　　The Further Adventures of Robinson Crusoeby Daniel Defoe

　　CHAPTER I - REVISITS ISLAND

　　THAT homely proverb, used on so many occasions in England, viz."That what is bred in the bone will not go out of the flesh," wasnever more verified than in the story of my Life.  Any one wouldthink that after thirty-five years' affliction, and a variety ofunhappy circumstances, which few men, if any, ever went throughbefore, and after near seven years of peace and enjoyment in thefulness of all things; grown old, and when, if ever, it might beallowed me to have had experience of every state of middle life,and to know which was most adapted to make a man completely happy;I say, after all this, any one would have thought that the nativepropensity to rambling which I gave an account of in my firstsetting out in the world to have been so predominant in mythoughts, should be worn out, and I might, at sixty one years ofage, have been a little inclined to stay at home, and have doneventuring life and fortune any more.

　　Nay, farther, the common motive of foreign adventures was takenaway in me, for I had no fortune to make; I had nothing to seek:if I had gained ten thousand pounds I had been no richer; for I hadalready sufficient for me, and for those I had to leave it to; andwhat I had was visibly increasing; for, having no great family, Icould not spend the income of what I had unless I would set up foran expensive way of living, such as a great family, servants,equipage, gaiety, and the like, which were things I had no notionof, or inclination to; so that I had nothing, indeed, to do but tosit still, and fully enjoy what I had got, and see it increasedaily upon my hands.  Yet all these things had no effect upon me,or at least not enough to resist the strong inclination I had to goabroad again, which hung about me like a chronic distemper.  Inparticular, the desire of seeing my new plantation in the island,and the colony I left there, ran in my head continually.  I dreamedof it all night, and my imagination ran upon it all day:  it wasuppermost in all my thoughts, and my fancy worked so steadily andstrongly upon it that I talked of it in my sleep; in short, nothingcould remove it out of my mind:  it even broke so violently intoall my discourses that it made my conversation tiresome, for Icould talk of nothing else; all my discourse ran into it, even toimpertinence; and I saw it myself.

　　I have often heard persons of good judgment say that all the stirthat people make in the world about ghosts and apparitions is owingto the strength of imagination, and the powerful operation of fancyin their minds; that there is no such thing as a spirit appearing,or a ghost walking; that people's poring affectionately upon thepast conversation of their deceased friends so realises it to themthat they are capable of fancying, upon some extraordinarycircumstances, that they see them, talk to them, and are answeredby them, when, in truth, there is nothing but shadow and vapour inthe thing, and they really know nothing of the matter.

　　For my part, I know not to this hour whether there are any suchthings as real apparitions, spectres, or walking of people afterthey are dead; or whether there is anything in the stories theytell us of that kind more than the product of vapours, sick minds,and wandering fancies:  but this I know, that my imagination workedup to such a height, and brought me into such excess of vapours, orwhat else I may call it, that I actually supposed myself often uponthe spot, at my old castle, behind the trees; saw my old Spaniard,Friday's father, and the reprobate sailors I left upon the island;nay, I fancied I talked with them, and looked at them steadily,though I was broad awake, as at persons just before me; and this Idid till I often frightened myself with the images my fancy

　　represented to me.  One time, in my sleep, I had the villainy ofthe three pirate sailors so lively related to me by the firstSpaniard, and Friday's father, that it was surprising:  they toldme how they barbarously attempted to murder all the Spaniards, andthat they set fire to the provisions they had laid up, on purposeto distress and starve them; things that I had never heard of, andthat, indeed, were never all of them true in fact:  but it was sowarm in my imagination, and so realised to me, that, to the hour Isaw them, I could not be persuaded but that it was or would betrue; also how I resented it, when the Spaniard complained to me;and how I brought them to justice, tried them, and ordered them allthree to be hanged.  What there was really in this shall be seen inits place; for however I came to form such things in my dream, andwhat secret converse of spirits injected it, yet there was, I say,much of it true.  I own that this dream had nothing in it literallyand specifically true; but the general part was so true - the base;villainous behaviour of these three hardened rogues was such, andhad been so much worse than all I can describe, that the dream hadtoo much similitude of the fact; and as I would afterwards havepunished them severely, so, if I had hanged them all, I had beenmuch in the right, and even should have been justified both by thelaws of God and man.

　　But to return to my story.  In this kind of temper I lived someyears; I had no enjoyment of my life, no pleasant hours, noagreeable diversion but what had something or other of this in it;so that my wife, who saw my mind wholly bent upon it, told me veryseriously one night that she believed there was some secret,powerful impulse of Providence upon me, which had determined me togo thither again; and that she found nothing hindered me going butmy being engaged to a wife and children.  She told me that it wastrue she could not think of parting with me:  but as she wasassured that if she was dead it would be the first thing I woulddo, so, as it seemed to her that the thing was determined above,she would not be the only obstruction; for, if I thought fit andresolved to go - [Here she found me very intent upon her words, andthat I looked very earnestly at her, so that it a little disorderedher, and she stopped.  I asked her why she did not go on, and sayout what she was going to say?  But I perceived that her heart wastoo full, and some tears stood in her eyes.]  "Speak out, my dear,"said I; "are you willing I should go?" - "No," says she, veryaffectionately, "I am far from willing; but if you are resolved togo," says she, "rather than I would be the only hindrance, I willgo with you:  for though I think it a most preposterous thing forone of your years, and in your condition, yet, if it must be," saidshe, again weeping, "I would not leave you; for if it be of Heavenyou must do it, there is no resisting it; and if Heaven make ityour duty to go, He will also make it mine to go with you, orotherwise dispose of me, that I may not obstruct it."

　　This affectionate behaviour of my wife's brought me a little out ofthe vapours, and I began to consider what I was doing; I correctedmy wandering fancy, and began to argue with myself sedately whatbusiness I had after threescore years, and after such a life oftedious sufferings and disasters, and closed in so happy and easy amanner; I, say, what business had I to rush into new hazards, andput myself upon adventures fit only for youth and poverty to runinto?

　　With those thoughts I considered my new engagement; that I had awife, one child born, and my wife then great with child of another;that I had all the world could give me, and had no need to seekhazard for gain; that I was declining in years, and ought to thinkrather of leaving what I had gained than of seeking to increase it;that as to what my wife had said of its being an impulse fromHeaven, and that it should be my duty to go, I had no notion ofthat; so, after many of these cogitations, I struggled with thepower of my imagination, reasoned myself out of it, as I believepeople may always do in like cases if they will:  in a word, Iconquered it, composed myself with such arguments as occurred to mythoughts, and which my present condition furnished me plentifullywith; and particularly, as the most effectual method, I resolved todivert myself with other things, and to engage in some businessthat might effectually tie me up from any more excursions of thiskind; for I found that thing return upon me chiefly when I wasidle, and had nothing to do, nor anything of moment immediatelybefore me.  To this purpose, I bought a little farm in the countyof Bedford, and resolved to remove myself thither.  I had a littleconvenient house upon it, and the land about it, I found, wascapable of great improvement; and it was many ways suited to myinclination, which delighted in cultivating, managing, planting,and improving of land; and particularly, being an inland country, Iwas removed from conversing among sailors and things relating tothe remote parts of the world.  I went down to my farm, settled myfamily, bought ploughs, harrows, a cart, waggon-horses, cows, andsheep, and, setting seriously to work, became in one half-year amere country gentleman.  My thoughts were entirely taken up inmanaging my servants, cultivating the ground, enclosing, planting,&c.; and I lived, as I thought, the most agreeable life that naturewas capable of directing, or that a man always bred to misfortuneswas capable of retreating to.

　　I farmed upon my own land; I had no rent to pay, was limited by noarticles; I could pull up or cut down as I pleased; what I plantedwas for myself, and what I improved was for my family; and havingthus left off the thoughts of wandering, I had not the leastdiscomfort in any part of life as to this world.  Now I thought,indeed, that I enjoyed the middle state of life which my father soearnestly recommended to me, and lived a kind of heavenly life,something like what is described by the poet, upon the subject of acountry life:-

　　"Free from vices, free from care,Age has no pain, and youth no snare."

　　But in the middle of all this felicity, one blow from unseenProvidence unhinged me at once; and not only made a breach upon meinevitable and incurable, but drove me, by its consequences, into adeep relapse of the wandering disposition, which, as I may say,being born in my very blood, soon recovered its hold of me; and,like the returns of a violent distemper, came on with anirresistible force upon me.  This blow was the loss of my wife.  Itis not my business here to write an elegy upon my wife, give acharacter of her particular virtues, and make my court to the sexby the flattery of a funeral sermon.  She was, in a few words, thestay of all my affairs; the centre of all my enterprises; theengine that, by her prudence, reduced me to that happy compass Iwas in, from the most extravagant and ruinous project that filledmy head, and did more to guide my rambling genius than a mother'stears, a father's instructions, a friend's counsel, or all my ownreasoning powers could do.  I was happy in listening to her, and inbeing moved by her entreaties; and to the last degree desolate anddislocated in the world by the loss of her.

　　When she was gone, the world looked awkwardly round me.  I was asmuch a stranger in it, in my thoughts, as I was in the Brazils,when I first went on shore there; and as much alone, except for theassistance of servants, as I was in my island.  I knew neither whatto think nor what to do.  I saw the world busy around me:  one partlabouring for bread, another part squandering in vile excesses orempty pleasures, but equally miserable because the end theyproposed still fled from them; for the men of pleasure every daysurfeited of their vice, and heaped up work for sorrow andrepentance; and the men of labour spent their strength in dailystruggling for bread to maintain the vital strength they labouredwith:  so living in a daily circulation of sorrow, living but towork, and working but to live, as if daily bread were the only endof wearisome life, and a wearisome life the only occasion of dailybread.

　　This put me in mind of the life I lived in my kingdom, the island;where I suffered no more corn to grow, because I did not want it;and bred no more goats, because I had no more use for them; wherethe money lay in the drawer till it grew mouldy, and had scarce thefavour to be looked upon in twenty years.  All these things, had Iimproved them as I ought to have done, and as reason and religionhad dictated to me, would have taught me to search farther thanhuman enjoyments for a full felicity; and that there was somethingwhich certainly was the reason and end of life superior to allthese things, and which was either to be possessed, or at leasthoped for, on this side of the grave.

　　But my sage counsellor was gone; I was like a ship without a pilot,that could only run afore the wind.  My thoughts ran all away againinto the old affair; my head was quite turned with the whimsies offoreign adventures; and all the pleasant, innocent amusements of myfarm, my garden, my cattle, and my family, which before entirelypossessed me, were nothing to me, had no relish, and were likemusic to one that has no ear, or food to one that has no taste.  Ina word, I resolved to leave off housekeeping, let my farm, andreturn to London; and in a few months after I did so.

　　When I came to London, I was still as uneasy as I was before; I hadno relish for the place, no employment in it, nothing to do but tosaunter about like an idle person, of whom it may be said he isperfectly useless in God's creation, and it is not one farthing'smatter to the rest of his kind whether he be dead or alive.  Thisalso was the thing which, of all circumstances of life, was themost my aversion, who had been all my days used to an active life;and I would often say to myself, "A state of idleness is the verydregs of life;" and, indeed, I thought I was much more suitablyemployed when I was twenty-six days making a deal board.

　　It was now the beginning of the year 1693, when my nephew, whom, asI have observed before, I had brought up to the sea, and had madehim commander of a ship, was come home from a short voyage toBilbao, being the first he had made.  He came to me, and told methat some merchants of his acquaintance had been proposing to himto go a voyage for them to the East Indies, and to China, asprivate traders.  "And now, uncle," says he, "if you will go to seawith me, I will engage to land you upon your old habitation in theisland; for we are to touch at the Brazils."

　　Nothing can be a greater demonstration of a future state, and ofthe existence of an invisible world, than the concurrence of secondcauses with the idea of things which we form in our minds,perfectly reserved, and not communicated to any in the world.

　　My nephew knew nothing how far my distemper of wandering wasreturned upon me, and I knew nothing of what he had in his thoughtto say, when that very morning, before he came to me, I had, in agreat deal of confusion of thought, and revolving every part of mycircumstances in my mind, come to this resolution, that I would goto Lisbon, and consult with my old sea-captain; and if it wasrational and practicable, I would go and see the island again, andwhat was become of my people there.  I had pleased myself with thethoughts of peopling the place, and carrying inhabitants fromhence, getting a patent for the possession and I know not what;when, in the middle of all this, in comes my nephew, as I havesaid, with his project of carrying me thither in his way to theEast Indies.

　　I paused a while at his words, and looking steadily at him, "Whatdevil," said I, "sent you on this unlucky errand?"  My nephewstared as if he had been frightened at first; but perceiving that Iwas not much displeased at the proposal, he recovered himself.  "Ihope it may not be an unlucky proposal, sir," says he.  "I daresayyou would be pleased to see your new colony there, where you oncereigned with more felicity than most of your brother monarchs inthe world."  In a word, the scheme hit so exactly with my temper,that is to say, the prepossession I was under, and of which I havesaid so much, that I told him, in a few words, if he agreed withthe merchants, I would go with him; but I told him I would notpromise to go any further than my own island.  "Why, sir," says he,"you don't want to be left there again, I hope?"  "But," said I,"can you not take me up again on your return?"  He told me it wouldnot be possible to do so; that the merchants would never allow himto come that way with a laden ship of such value, it being amonth's sail out of his way, and might be three or four.  "Besides,sir, if I should miscarry," said he, "and not return at all, thenyou would be just reduced to the condition you were in before."

　　This was very rational; but we both found out a remedy for it,which was to carry a framed sloop on board the ship, which, beingtaken in pieces, might, by the help of some carpenters, whom weagreed to carry with us, be set up again in the island, andfinished fit to go to sea in a few days.  I was not long resolving,for indeed the importunities of my nephew joined so effectuallywith my inclination that nothing could oppose me; on the otherhand, my wife being dead, none concerned themselves so much for meas to persuade me one way or the other, except my ancient goodfriend the widow, who earnestly struggled with me to consider myyears, my easy circumstances, and the needless hazards of a longvoyage; and above all, my young children.  But it was all to nopurpose, I had an irresistible desire for the voyage; and I toldher I thought there was something so uncommon in the impressions Ihad upon my mind, that it would be a kind of resisting Providenceif I should attempt to stay at home; after which she ceased herexpostulations, and joined with me, not only in making provisionfor my voyage, but also in settling my family affairs for myabsence, and providing for the education of my children.  In orderto do this, I made my will, and settled the estate I had in such amanner for my children, and placed in such hands, that I wasperfectly easy and satisfied they would have justice done them,whatever might befall me; and for their education, I left it whollyto the widow, with a sufficient maintenance to herself for hercare:  all which she richly deserved; for no mother could havetaken more care in their education, or understood it better; and asshe lived till I came home, I also lived to thank her for it.

　　My nephew was ready to sail about the beginning of January 1694-5;and I, with my man Friday, went on board, in the Downs, the 8th;having, besides that sloop which I mentioned above, a veryconsiderable cargo of all kinds of necessary things for my colony,which, if I did not find in good condition, I resolved to leave so.

　　First, I carried with me some servants whom I purposed to placethere as inhabitants, or at least to set on work there upon myaccount while I stayed, and either to leave them there or carrythem forward, as they should appear willing; particularly, Icarried two carpenters, a smith, and a very handy, ingeniousfellow, who was a cooper by trade, and was also a general mechanic;for he was dexterous at making wheels and hand-mills to grind corn,was a good turner and a good pot-maker; he also made anything thatwas proper to make of earth or of wood:  in a word, we called himour Jack-of-all-trades.  With these I carried a tailor, who hadoffered himself to go a passenger to the East Indies with mynephew, but afterwards consented to stay on our new plantation, andwho proved a most necessary handy fellow as could be desired inmany other businesses besides that of his trade; for, as I observedformerly, necessity arms us for all employments.

　　My cargo, as near as I can recollect, for I have not kept accountof the particulars, consisted of a sufficient quantity of linen,and some English thin stuffs, for clothing the Spaniards that Iexpected to find there; and enough of them, as by my calculationmight comfortably supply them for seven years; if I remember right,the materials I carried for clothing them, with gloves, hats,shoes, stockings, and all such things as they could want forwearing, amounted to about two hundred pounds, including some beds,bedding, and household stuff, particularly kitchen utensils, withpots, kettles, pewter, brass, &c.; and near a hundred pounds morein ironwork, nails, tools of every kind, staples, hooks, hinges,and every necessary thing I could think of.

　　I carried also a hundred spare arms, muskets, and fusees; besidessome pistols, a considerable quantity of shot of all sizes, threeor four tons of lead, and two pieces of brass cannon; and, becauseI knew not what time and what extremities I was providing for, Icarried a hundred barrels of powder, besides swords, cutlasses, andthe iron part of some pikes and halberds.  In short, we had a largemagazine of all sorts of store; and I made my nephew carry twosmall quarter-deck guns more than he wanted for his ship, to leavebehind if there was occasion; so that when we came there we mightbuild a fort and man it against all sorts of enemies.  Indeed, I atfirst thought there would be need enough for all, and much more, ifwe hoped to maintain our possession of the island, as shall be seenin the course of that story.

　　I had not such bad luck in this voyage as I had been used to meetwith, and therefore shall have the less occasion to interrupt thereader, who perhaps may be impatient to hear how matters went withmy colony; yet some odd accidents, cross winds and bad weatherhappened on this first setting out, which made the voyage longerthan I expected it at first; and I, who had never made but onevoyage, my first voyage to Guinea, in which I might be said to comeback again, as the voyage was at first designed, began to think thesame ill fate attended me, and that I was born to be nevercontented with being on shore, and yet to be always unfortunate atsea.  Contrary winds first put us to the northward, and we wereobliged to put in at Galway, in Ireland, where we lay wind-boundtwo-and-twenty days; but we had this satisfaction with thedisaster, that provisions were here exceeding cheap, and in theutmost plenty; so that while we lay here we never touched theship's stores, but rather added to them.  Here, also, I took inseveral live hogs, and two cows with their calves, which Iresolved, if I had a good passage, to put on shore in my island;but we found occasion to dispose otherwise of them.

　　We set out on the 5th of February from Ireland, and had a very fairgale of wind for some days.  As I remember, it might be about the20th of February in the evening late, when the mate, having thewatch, came into the round-house and told us he saw a flash offire, and heard a gun fired; and while he was telling us of it, aboy came in and told us the boatswain heard another.  This made usall run out upon the quarter-deck, where for a while we heardnothing; but in a few minutes we saw a very great light, and foundthat there was some very terrible fire at a distance; immediatelywe had recourse to our reckonings, in which we all agreed thatthere could be no land that way in which the fire showed itself,no, not for five hundred leagues, for it appeared at WNW.  Uponthis, we concluded it must be some ship on fire at sea; and as, byour hearing the noise of guns just before, we concluded that itcould not be far off, we stood directly towards it, and werepresently satisfied we should discover it, because the further wesailed, the greater the light appeared; though, the weather beinghazy, we could not perceive anything but the light for a while.  Inabout half-an-hour's sailing, the wind being fair for us, thoughnot much of it, and the weather clearing up a little, we couldplainly discern that it was a great ship on fire in the middle ofthe sea.

　　I was most sensibly touched with this disaster, though not at allacquainted with the persons engaged in it; I presently recollectedmy former circumstances, and what condition I was in when taken upby the Portuguese captain; and how much more deplorable thecircumstances of the poor creatures belonging to that ship must be,if they had no other ship in company with them.  Upon this Iimmediately ordered that five guns should be fired, one soon afteranother, that, if possible, we might give notice to them that therewas help for them at hand and that they might endeavour to savethemselves in their boat; for though we could see the flames of theship, yet they, it being night, could see nothing of us.

　　We lay by some time upon this, only driving as the burning shipdrove, waiting for daylight; when, on a sudden, to our greatterror, though we had reason to expect it, the ship blew up in theair; and in a few minutes all the fire was out, that is to say, therest of the ship sunk.  This was a terrible, and indeed anafflicting sight, for the sake of the poor men, who, I concluded,must be either all destroyed in the ship, or be in the utmostdistress in their boat, in the middle of the ocean; which, atpresent, as it was dark, I could not see.  However, to direct themas well as I could, I caused lights to be hung out in all parts ofthe ship where we could, and which we had lanterns for, and keptfiring guns all the night long, letting them know by this thatthere was a ship not far off.

　　About eight o'clock in the morning we discovered the ship's boatsby the help of our perspective glasses, and found there were two ofthem, both thronged with people, and deep in the water.  Weperceived they rowed, the wind being against them; that they sawour ship, and did their utmost to make us see them.  We immediatelyspread our ancient, to let them know we saw them, and hung a waftout, as a signal for them to come on board, and then made moresail, standing directly to them.  In little more than half-an-hourwe came up with them; and took them all in, being no less thansixty-four men, women, and children; for there were a great manypassengers.

　　Upon inquiry we found it was a French merchant ship of three-hundred tons, home-bound from Quebec.  The master gave us a longaccount of the distress of his ship; how the fire began in thesteerage by the negligence of the steersman, which, on his cryingout for help, was, as everybody thought, entirely put out; but theysoon found that some sparks of the first fire had got into somepart of the ship so difficult to come at that they could noteffectually quench it; and afterwards getting in between thetimbers, and within the ceiling of the ship, it proceeded into thehold, and mastered all the skill and all the application they wereable to exert.

　　They had no more to do then but to get into their boats, which, totheir great comfort, were pretty large; being their long-boat, anda great shallop, besides a small skiff, which was of no greatservice to them, other than to get some fresh water and provisionsinto her, after they had secured their lives from the fire.  Theyhad, indeed, small hopes of their lives by getting into these boatsat that distance from any land; only, as they said, that they thusescaped from the fire, and there was a possibility that some shipmight happen to be at sea, and might take them in.  They had sails,oars, and a compass; and had as much provision and water as, withsparing it so as to be next door to starving, might support themabout twelve days, in which, if they had no bad weather and nocontrary winds, the captain said he hoped he might get to the banksof Newfoundland, and might perhaps take some fish, to sustain themtill they might go on shore.  But there were so many chancesagainst them in all these cases, such as storms, to overset andfounder them; rains and cold, to benumb and perish their limbs;contrary winds, to keep them out and starve them; that it must havebeen next to miraculous if they had escaped.

　　In the midst of their consternation, every one being hopeless andready to despair, the captain, with tears in his eyes, told me theywere on a sudden surprised with the joy of hearing a gun fire, andafter that four more:  these were the five guns which I caused tobe fired at first seeing the light.  This revived their hearts, andgave them the notice, which, as above, I desired it should, thatthere was a ship at hand for their help.  It was upon the hearingof these guns that they took down their masts and sails:  the soundcoming from the windward, they resolved to lie by till morning.Some time after this, hearing no more guns, they fired threemuskets, one a considerable while after another; but these, thewind being contrary, we never heard.  Some time after that againthey were still more agreeably surprised with seeing our lights,and hearing the guns, which, as I have said, I caused to be firedall the rest of the night.  This set them to work with their oars,to keep their boats ahead, at least that we might the sooner comeup with them; and at last, to their inexpressible joy, they foundwe saw them.

　　It is impossible for me to express the several gestures, thestrange ecstasies, the variety of postures which these poordelivered people ran into, to express the joy of their souls at sounexpected a deliverance.  Grief and fear are easily described:sighs, tears, groans, and a very few motions of the head and hands,make up the sum of its variety; but an excess of joy, a surprise ofjoy, has a thousand extravagances in it.  There were some in tears;some raging and tearing themselves, as if they had been in thegreatest agonies of sorrow; some stark raving and downrightlunatic; some ran about the ship stamping with their feet, otherswringing their hands; some were dancing, some singing, somelaughing, more crying, many quite dumb, not able to speak a word;others sick and vomiting; several swooning and ready to faint; anda few were crossing themselves and giving God thanks.

　　I would not wrong them either; there might be many that werethankful afterwards; but the passion was too strong for them atfirst, and they were not able to master it:  then were thrown intoecstasies, and a kind of frenzy, and it was but a very few thatwere composed and serious in their joy.  Perhaps also, the case mayhave some addition to it from the particular circumstance of thatnation they belonged to:  I mean the French, whose temper isallowed to be more volatile, more passionate, and more sprightly,and their spirits more fluid than in other nations.  I am notphilosopher enough to determine the cause; but nothing I had everseen before came up to it.  The ecstasies poor Friday, my trustysavage, was in when he found his father in the boat came thenearest to it; and the surprise of the master and his twocompanions, whom I delivered from the villains that set them onshore in the island, came a little way towards it; but nothing wasto compare to this, either that I saw in Friday, or anywhere elsein my life.

　　It is further observable, that these extravagances did not showthemselves in that different manner I have mentioned, in differentpersons only; but all the variety would appear, in a shortsuccession of moments, in one and the same person.  A man that wesaw this minute dumb, and, as it were, stupid and confounded, wouldthe next minute be dancing and hallooing like an antic; and thenext moment be tearing his hair, or pulling his clothes to pieces,and stamping them under his feet like a madman; in a few momentsafter that we would have him all in tears, then sick, swooning,and, had not immediate help been had, he would in a few momentshave been dead.  Thus it was, not with one or two, or ten ortwenty, but with the greatest part of them; and, if I rememberright, our surgeon was obliged to let blood of about thirtypersons.

　　There were two priests among them:  one an old man, and the other ayoung man; and that which was strangest was, the oldest man was theworst.  As soon as he set his foot on board our ship, and sawhimself safe, he dropped down stone dead to all appearance.  Notthe least sign of life could be perceived in him; our surgeonimmediately applied proper remedies to recover him, and was theonly man in the ship that believed he was not dead.  At length heopened a vein in his arm, having first chafed and rubbed the part,so as to warm it as much as possible.  Upon this the blood, whichonly dropped at first, flowing freely, in three minutes after theman opened his eyes; a quarter of an hour after that he spoke, grewbetter, and after the blood was stopped, he walked about, told ushe was perfectly well, and took a dram of cordial which the surgeongave him.  About a quarter of an hour after this they came runninginto the cabin to the surgeon, who was bleeding a Frenchwoman thathad fainted, and told him the priest was gone stark mad.  It seemshe had begun to revolve the change of his circumstances in hismind, and again this put him into an ecstasy of joy.  His spiritswhirled about faster than the vessels could convey them, the bloodgrew hot and feverish, and the man was as fit for Bedlam as anycreature that ever was in it.  The surgeon would not bleed himagain in that condition, but gave him something to doze and put himto sleep; which, after some time, operated upon him, and he awokenext morning perfectly composed and well.  The younger priestbehaved with great command of his passions, and was really anexample of a serious, well-governed mind.  At his first coming onboard the ship he threw himself flat on his face, prostratinghimself in thankfulness for his deliverance, in which I unhappilyand unseasonably disturbed him, really thinking he had been in aswoon; but he spoke calmly, thanked me, told me he was giving Godthanks for his deliverance, begged me to leave him a few moments,and that, next to his Maker, he would give me thanks also.  I washeartily sorry that I disturbed him, and not only left him, butkept others from interrupting him also.  He continued in thatposture about three minutes, or little more, after I left him, thencame to me, as he had said he would, and with a great deal ofseriousness and affection, but with tears in his eyes, thanked me,that had, under God, given him and so many miserable creaturestheir lives.  I told him I had no need to tell him to thank God forit, rather than me, for I had seen that he had done that already;but I added that it was nothing but what reason and humanitydictated to all men, and that we had as much reason as he to givethanks to God, who had blessed us so far as to make us theinstruments of His mercy to so many of His creatures.  After thisthe young priest applied himself to his countrymen, and laboured tocompose them:  he persuaded, entreated, argued, reasoned with them,and did his utmost to keep them within the exercise of theirreason; and with some he had success, though others were for a timeout of all government of themselves.

　　I cannot help committing this to writing, as perhaps it may beuseful to those into whose hands it may fall, for guidingthemselves in the extravagances of their passions; for if an excessof joy can carry men out to such a length beyond the reach of theirreason, what will not the extravagances of anger, rage, and aprovoked mind carry us to?  And, indeed, here I saw reason forkeeping an exceeding watch over our passions of every kind, as wellthose of joy and satisfaction as those of sorrow and anger.

　　We were somewhat disordered by these extravagances among our newguests for the first day; but after they had retired to lodgingsprovided for them as well as our ship would allow, and had sleptheartily - as most of them did, being fatigued and frightened -they were quite another sort of people the next day.  Nothing ofgood manners, or civil acknowledgments for the kindness shown them,was wanting; the French, it is known, are naturally apt enough toexceed that way.  The captain and one of the priests came to me thenext day, and desired to speak with me and my nephew; the commanderbegan to consult with us what should be done with them; and first,they told us we had saved their lives, so all they had was littleenough for a return to us for that kindness received.  The captainsaid they had saved some money and some things of value in theirboats, caught hastily out of the flames, and if we would accept itthey were ordered to make an offer of it all to us; they onlydesired to be set on shore somewhere in our way, where, ifpossible, they might get a passage to France.  My nephew wished toaccept their money at first word, and to consider what to do withthem afterwards; but I overruled him in that part, for I knew whatit was to be set on shore in a strange country; and if thePortuguese captain that took me up at sea had served me so, andtaken all I had for my deliverance, I must have been starved, orhave been as much a slave at the Brazils as I had been at Barbary,the mere being sold to a Mahometan excepted; and perhaps aPortuguese is not a much better master than a Turk, if not in somecases much worse.

　　I therefore told the French captain that we had taken them up intheir distress, it was true, but that it was our duty to do so, aswe were fellow-creatures; and we would desire to be so delivered ifwe were in the like or any other extremity; that we had donenothing for them but what we believed they would have done for usif we had been in their case and they in ours; but that we tookthem up to save them, not to plunder them; and it would be a mostbarbarous thing to take that little from them which they had savedout of the fire, and then set them on shore and leave them; thatthis would be first to save them from death, and then kill themourselves:  save them from drowning, and abandon them to starving;and therefore I would not let the least thing be taken from them.As to setting them on shore, I told them indeed that was anexceeding difficulty to us, for that the ship was bound to the EastIndies; and though we were driven out of our course to the westwarda very great way, and perhaps were directed by Heaven on purposefor their deliverance, yet it was impossible for us wilfully tochange our voyage on their particular account; nor could my nephew,the captain, answer it to the freighters, with whom he was undercharter to pursue his voyage by way of Brazil; and all I knew wecould do for them was to put ourselves in the way of meeting withother ships homeward bound from the West Indies, and get them apassage, if possible, to England or France.

　　The first part of the proposal was so generous and kind they couldnot but be very thankful for it; but they were in very greatconsternation, especially the passengers, at the notion of beingcarried away to the East Indies; they then entreated me that as Iwas driven so far to the westward before I met with them, I wouldat least keep on the same course to the banks of Newfoundland,where it was probable I might meet with some ship or sloop thatthey might hire to carry them back to Canada.

　　I thought this was but a reasonable request on their part, andtherefore I inclined to agree to it; for indeed I considered thatto carry this whole company to the East Indies would not only be anintolerable severity upon the poor people, but would be ruining ourwhole voyage by devouring all our provisions; so I thought it nobreach of charter-party, but what an unforeseen accident madeabsolutely necessary to us, and in which no one could say we wereto blame; for the laws of God and nature would have forbid that weshould refuse to take up two boats full of people in such adistressed condition; and the nature of the thing, as wellrespecting ourselves as the poor people, obliged us to set them onshore somewhere or other for their deliverance.  So I consentedthat we would carry them to Newfoundland, if wind and weather wouldpermit:  and if not, I would carry them to Martinico, in the WestIndies.

　　The wind continued fresh easterly, but the weather pretty good; andas the winds had continued in the points between NE. and SE. a longtime, we missed several opportunities of sending them to France;for we met several ships bound to Europe, whereof two were French,from St. Christopher's, but they had been so long beating upagainst the wind that they durst take in no passengers, for fear ofwanting provisions for the voyage, as well for themselves as forthose they should take in; so we were obliged to go on.  It wasabout a week after this that we made the banks of Newfoundland;where, to shorten my story, we put all our French people on board abark, which they hired at sea there, to put them on shore, andafterwards to carry them to France, if they could get provisions tovictual themselves with.  When I say all the French went on shore,I should remember that the young priest I spoke of, hearing we werebound to the East Indies, desired to go the voyage with us, and tobe set on shore on the coast of Coromandel; which I readily agreedto, for I wonderfully liked the man, and had very good reason, aswill appear afterwards; also four of the seamen entered themselveson our ship, and proved very useful fellows.

　　From hence we directed our course for the West Indies, steeringaway S. and S. by E. for about twenty days together, sometimeslittle or no wind at all; when we met with another subject for ourhumanity to work upon, almost as deplorable as that before.

　　CHAPTER II -  INTERVENING HISTORY OF COLONY

　　IT was in the latitude of 27 degrees 5 minutes N., on the 19th dayof March 1694-95, when we spied a sail, our course SE. and by S.We soon perceived it was a large vessel, and that she bore up tous, but could not at first know what to make of her, till, aftercoming a little nearer, we found she had lost her main-topmast,fore-mast, and bowsprit; and presently she fired a gun as a signalof distress.  The weather was pretty good, wind at NNW. a freshgale, and we soon came to speak with her.  We found her a ship ofBristol, bound home from Barbadoes, but had been blown out of theroad at Barbadoes a few days before she was ready to sail, by aterrible hurricane, while the captain and chief mate were both goneon shore; so that, besides the terror of the storm, they were in anindifferent case for good mariners to bring the ship home.  Theyhad been already nine weeks at sea, and had met with anotherterrible storm, after the hurricane was over, which had blown themquite out of their knowledge to the westward, and in which theylost their masts.  They told us they expected to have seen theBahama Islands, but were then driven away again to the south-east,by a strong gale of wind at NNW., the same that blew now:  andhaving no sails to work the ship with but a main course, and a kindof square sail upon a jury fore-mast, which they had set up, theycould not lie near the wind, but were endeavouring to stand awayfor the Canaries.

　　But that which was worst of all was, that they were almost starvedfor want of provisions, besides the fatigues they had undergone;their bread and flesh were quite gone - they had not one ounce leftin the ship, and had had none for eleven days.  The only reliefthey had was, their water was not all spent, and they had abouthalf a barrel of flour left; they had sugar enough; some succades,or sweetmeats, they had at first, but these were all devoured; andthey had seven casks of rum.  There was a youth and his mother anda maid-servant on board, who were passengers, and thinking the shipwas ready to sail, unhappily came on board the evening before thehurricane began; and having no provisions of their own left, theywere in a more deplorable condition than the rest:  for the seamenbeing reduced to such an extreme necessity themselves, had nocompassion, we may be sure, for the poor passengers; and they were,indeed, in such a condition that their misery is very hard todescribe.

　　I had perhaps not known this part, if my curiosity had not led me,the weather being fair and the wind abated, to go on board theship.  The second mate, who upon this occasion commanded the ship,had been on board our ship, and he told me they had threepassengers in the great cabin that were in a deplorable condition."Nay," says he, "I believe they are dead, for I have heard nothingof them for above two days; and I was afraid to inquire afterthem," said he, "for I had nothing to relieve them with."  Weimmediately applied ourselves to give them what relief we couldspare; and indeed I had so far overruled things with my nephew,that I would have victualled them though we had gone away toVirginia, or any other part of the coast of America, to havesupplied ourselves; but there was no necessity for that.

　　But now they were in a new danger; for they were afraid of eatingtoo much, even of that little we gave them.  The mate, orcommander, brought six men with him in his boat; but these poorwretches looked like skeletons, and were so weak that they couldhardly sit to their oars.  The mate himself was very ill, and halfstarved; for he declared he had reserved nothing from the men, andwent share and share alike with them in every bit they ate.  Icautioned him to eat sparingly, and set meat before himimmediately, but he had not eaten three mouthfuls before he beganto be sick and out of order; so he stopped a while, and our surgeonmixed him up something with some broth, which he said would be tohim both food and physic; and after he had taken it he grew better.In the meantime I forgot not the men.  I ordered victuals to begiven them, and the poor creatures rather devoured than ate it:they were so exceedingly hungry that they were in a mannerravenous, and had no command of themselves; and two of them atewith so much greediness that they were in danger of their lives thenext morning.  The sight of these people's distress was very movingto me, and brought to mind what I had a terrible prospect of at myfirst coming on shore in my island, where I had not the leastmouthful of food, or any prospect of procuring any; besides thehourly apprehensions I had of being made the food of othercreatures.  But all the while the mate was thus relating to me themiserable condition of the ship's company, I could not put out ofmy thought the story he had told me of the three poor creatures inthe great cabin, viz. the mother, her son, and the maid-servant,whom he had heard nothing of for two or three days, and whom, heseemed to confess, they had wholly neglected, their own extremitiesbeing so great; by which I understood that they had really giventhem no food at all, and that therefore they must be perished, andbe all lying dead, perhaps, on the floor or deck of the cabin.

　　As I therefore kept the mate, whom we then called captain, on boardwith his men, to refresh them, so I also forgot not the starvingcrew that were left on board, but ordered my own boat to go onboard the ship, and, with my mate and twelve men, to carry them asack of bread, and four or five pieces of beef to boil.  Oursurgeon charged the men to cause the meat to be boiled while theystayed, and to keep guard in the cook-room, to prevent the mentaking it to eat raw, or taking it out of the pot before it waswell boiled, and then to give every man but a very little at atime:  and by this caution he preserved the men, who wouldotherwise have killed themselves with that very food that was giventhem on purpose to save their lives.

　　At the same time I ordered the mate to go into the great cabin, andsee what condition the poor passengers were in; and if they werealive, to comfort them, and give them what refreshment was proper:and the surgeon gave him a large pitcher, with some of the preparedbroth which he had given the mate that was on board, and which hedid not question would restore them gradually.  I was not satisfiedwith this; but, as I said above, having a great mind to see thescene of misery which I knew the ship itself would present me with,in a more lively manner than I could have it by report, I took thecaptain of the ship, as we now called him, with me, and wentmyself, a little after, in their boat.

　　I found the poor men on board almost in a tumult to get thevictuals out of the boiler before it was ready; but my mateobserved his orders, and kept a good guard at the cook-room door,and the man he placed there, after using all possible persuasion tohave patience, kept them off by force; however, he caused somebiscuit-cakes to be dipped in the pot, and softened with the liquorof the meat, which they called brewis, and gave them every one someto stay their stomachs, and told them it was for their own safetythat he was obliged to give them but little at a time.  But it wasall in vain; and had I not come on board, and their own commanderand officers with me, and with good words, and some threats also ofgiving them no more, I believe they would have broken into thecook-room by force, and torn the meat out of the furnace - forwords are indeed of very small force to a hungry belly; however, wepacified them, and fed them gradually and cautiously at first, andthe next time gave them more, and at last filled their bellies, andthe men did well enough.

　　But the misery of the poor passengers in the cabin was of anothernature, and far beyond the rest; for as, first, the ship's companyhad so little for themselves, it was but too true that they had atfirst kept them very low, and at last totally neglected them:  sothat for six or seven days it might be said they had really no foodat all, and for several days before very little.  The poor mother,who, as the men reported, was a woman of sense and good breeding,had spared all she could so affectionately for her son, that atlast she entirely sank under it; and when the mate of our ship wentin, she sat upon the floor on deck, with her back up against thesides, between two chairs, which were lashed fast, and her headsunk between her shoulders like a corpse, though not quite dead.My mate said all he could to revive and encourage her, and with aspoon put some broth into her mouth.  She opened her lips, andlifted up one hand, but could not speak:  yet she understood whathe said, and made signs to him, intimating, that it was too latefor her, but pointed to her child, as if she would have said theyshould take care of him.  However, the mate, who was exceedinglymoved at the sight, endeavoured to get some of the broth into hermouth, and, as he said, got two or three spoonfuls down - though Iquestion whether he could be sure of it or not; but it was toolate, and she died the same night.

　　The youth, who was preserved at the price of his most affectionatemother's life, was not so far gone; yet he lay in a cabin bed, asone stretched out, with hardly any life left in him.  He had apiece of an old glove in his mouth, having eaten up the rest of it;however, being young, and having more strength than his mother, themate got something down his throat, and he began sensibly torevive; though by giving him, some time after, but two or threespoonfuls extraordinary, he was very sick, and brought it up again.

　　But the next care was the poor maid:  she lay all along upon thedeck, hard by her mistress, and just like one that had fallen downin a fit of apoplexy, and struggled for life.  Her limbs weredistorted; one of her hands was clasped round the frame of thechair, and she gripped it so hard that we could not easily make herlet it go; her other arm lay over her head, and her feet lay bothtogether, set fast against the frame of the cabin table:  in short,she lay just like one in the agonies of death, and yet she wasalive too.  The poor creature was not only starved with hunger, andterrified with the thoughts of death, but, as the men told usafterwards, was broken-hearted for her mistress, whom she saw dyingfor two or three days before, and whom she loved most tenderly.  Weknew not what to do with this poor girl; for when our surgeon, whowas a man of very great knowledge and experience, had, with greatapplication, recovered her as to life, he had her upon his handsstill; for she was little less than distracted for a considerabletime after.

　　Whoever shall read these memorandums must be desired to considerthat visits at sea are not like a journey into the country, wheresometimes people stay a week or a fortnight at a place.  Ourbusiness was to relieve this distressed ship's crew, but not lie byfor them; and though they were willing to steer the same coursewith us for some days, yet we could carry no sail to keep pace witha ship that had no masts.  However, as their captain begged of usto help him to set up a main-topmast, and a kind of a topmast tohis jury fore-mast, we did, as it were, lie by him for three orfour days; and then, having given him five barrels of beef, abarrel of pork, two hogsheads of biscuit, and a proportion of peas,flour, and what other things we could spare; and taking three casksof sugar, some rum, and some pieces of eight from them forsatisfaction, we left them, taking on board with us, at their ownearnest request, the youth and the maid, and all their goods.

　　The young lad was about seventeen years of age, a pretty, well-bred, modest, and sensible youth, greatly dejected with the loss ofhis mother, and also at having lost his father but a few monthsbefore, at Barbadoes.  He begged of the surgeon to speak to me totake him out of the ship; for he said the cruel fellows hadmurdered his mother:  and indeed so they had, that is to say,passively; for they might have spared a small sustenance to thepoor helpless widow, though it had been but just enough to keep heralive; but hunger knows no friend, no relation, no justice, noright, and therefore is remorseless, and capable of no compassion.

　　The surgeon told him how far we were going, and that it would carryhim away from all his friends, and put him, perhaps, in as badcircumstances almost as those we found him in, that is to say,starving in the world.  He said it mattered not whither he went, ifhe was but delivered from the terrible crew that he was among; thatthe captain (by which he meant me, for he could know nothing of mynephew) had saved his life, and he was sure would not hurt him; andas for the maid, he was sure, if she came to herself, she would bevery thankful for it, let us carry them where we would.  Thesurgeon represented the case so affectionately to me that Iyielded, and we took them both on board, with all their goods,except eleven hogsheads of sugar, which could not be removed orcome at; and as the youth had a bill of lading for them, I made hiscommander sign a writing, obliging himself to go, as soon as hecame to Bristol, to one Mr. Rogers, a merchant there, to whom theyouth said he was related, and to deliver a letter which I wrote tohim, and all the goods he had belonging to the deceased widow;which, I suppose, was not done, for I could never learn that theship came to Bristol, but was, as is most probable, lost at sea,being in so disabled a condition, and so far from any land, that Iam of opinion the first storm she met with afterwards she mightfounder, for she was leaky, and had damage in her hold when we metwith her.

　　I was now in the latitude of 19 degrees 32 minutes, and hadhitherto a tolerable voyage as to weather, though at first thewinds had been contrary.  I shall trouble nobody with the littleincidents of wind, weather, currents, &c., on the rest of ourvoyage; but to shorten my story, shall observe that I came to myold habitation, the island, on the 10th of April 1695.  It was withno small difficulty that I found the place; for as I came to it andwent to it before on the south and east side of the island, comingfrom the Brazils, so now, coming in between the main and theisland, and having no chart for the coast, nor any landmark, I didnot know it when I saw it, or, know whether I saw it or not.  Webeat about a great while, and went on shore on several islands inthe mouth of the great river Orinoco, but none for my purpose; onlythis I learned by my coasting the shore, that I was under one greatmistake before, viz. that the continent which I thought I saw fromthe island I lived in was really no continent, but a long island,or rather a ridge of islands, reaching from one to the other sideof the extended mouth of that great river; and that the savages whocame to my island were not properly those which we call Caribbees,but islanders, and other barbarians of the same kind, who inhabitednearer to our side than the rest.

　　In short, I visited several of these islands to no purpose; some Ifound were inhabited, and some were not; on one of them I foundsome Spaniards, and thought they had lived there; but speaking withthem, found they had a sloop lying in a small creek hard by, andcame thither to make salt, and to catch some pearl-mussels if theycould; but that they belonged to the Isle de Trinidad, which layfarther north, in the latitude of 10 and 11 degrees.

　　Thus coasting from one island to another, sometimes with the ship,sometimes with the Frenchman's shallop, which we had found aconvenient boat, and therefore kept her with their very good will,at length I came fair on the south side of my island, and presentlyknew the very countenance of the place:  so I brought the ship safeto an anchor, broadside with the little creek where my oldhabitation was.  As soon as I saw the place I called for Friday,and asked him if he knew where he was?  He looked about a little,and presently clapping his hands, cried, "Oh yes, Oh there, Oh yes,Oh there!" pointing to our old habitation, and fell dancing andcapering like a mad fellow; and I had much ado to keep him fromjumping into the sea to swim ashore to the place.

　　"Well, Friday," says I, "do you think we shall find anybody here orno? and do you think we shall see your father?"  The fellow stoodmute as a stock a good while; but when I named his father, the pooraffectionate creature looked dejected, and I could see the tearsrun down his face very plentifully.  "What is the matter, Friday?are you troubled because you may see your father?"  "No, no," sayshe, shaking his head, "no see him more:  no, never more see himagain."  "Why so, Friday? how do you know that?"  "Oh no, Oh no,"says Friday, "he long ago die, long ago; he much old man."  "Well,well, Friday, you don't know; but shall we see any one else, then?"The fellow, it seems, had better eyes than I, and he points to thehill just above my old house; and though we lay half a league off,he cries out, "We see! we see! yes, we see much man there, andthere, and there."  I looked, but I saw nobody, no, not with aperspective glass, which was, I suppose, because I could not hitthe place:  for the fellow was right, as I found upon inquiry thenext day; and there were five or six men all together, who stood tolook at the ship, not knowing what to think of us.

　　As soon as Friday told me he saw people, I caused the Englishancient to be spread, and fired three guns, to give them notice wewere friends; and in about a quarter of an hour after we perceiveda smoke arise from the side of the creek; so I immediately orderedthe boat out, taking Friday with me, and hanging out a white flag,I went directly on shore, taking with me the young friar Imentioned, to whom I had told the story of my living there, and themanner of it, and every particular both of myself and those I leftthere, and who was on that account extremely desirous to go withme.  We had, besides, about sixteen men well armed, if we had foundany new guests there which we did not know of; but we had no needof weapons.

　　As we went on shore upon the tide of flood, near high water, werowed directly into the creek; and the first man I fixed my eyeupon was the Spaniard whose life I had saved, and whom I knew byhis face perfectly well:  as to his habit, I shall describe itafterwards.  I ordered nobody to go on shore at first but myself;but there was no keeping Friday in the boat, for the affectionatecreature had spied his father at a distance, a good way off theSpaniards, where, indeed, I saw nothing of him; and if they had notlet him go ashore, he would have jumped into the sea.  He was nosooner on shore, but he flew away to his father like an arrow outof a bow.  It would have made any man shed tears, in spite of thefirmest resolution, to have seen the first transports of this poorfellow's joy when he came to his father:  how he embraced him,kissed him, stroked his face, took him up in his arms, set him downupon a tree, and lay down by him; then stood and looked at him, asany one would look at a strange picture, for a quarter of an hourtogether; then lay down on the ground, and stroked his legs, andkissed them, and then got up again and stared at him; one wouldhave thought the fellow bewitched.  But it would have made a doglaugh the next day to see how his passion ran out another way:  inthe morning he walked along the shore with his father severalhours, always leading him by the hand, as if he had been a lady;and every now and then he would come to the boat to fetch somethingor other for him, either a lump of sugar, a dram, a biscuit, orsomething or other that was good.  In the afternoon his frolics rananother way; for then he would set the old man down upon theground, and dance about him, and make a thousand antic gestures;and all the while he did this he would be talking to him, andtelling him one story or another of his travels, and of what hadhappened to him abroad to divert him.  In short, if the same filialaffection was to be found in Christians to their parents in ourpart of the world, one would be tempted to say there would hardlyhave been any need of the fifth commandment.

　　But this is a digression:  I return to my landing.  It would beneedless to take notice of all the ceremonies and civilities thatthe Spaniards received me with.  The first Spaniard, whom, as Isaid, I knew very well, was he whose life I had saved.  He cametowards the boat, attended by one more, carrying a flag of trucealso; and he not only did not know me at first, but he had nothoughts, no notion of its being me that was come, till I spoke tohim.  "Seignior," said I, in Portuguese, "do you not know me?"  Atwhich he spoke not a word, but giving his musket to the man thatwas with him, threw his arms abroad, saying something in Spanishthat I did not perfectly hear, came forward and embraced me,telling me he was inexcusable not to know that face again that hehad once seen, as of an angel from heaven sent to save his life; hesaid abundance of very handsome things, as a well-bred Spaniardalways knows how, and then, beckoning to the person that attendedhim, bade him go and call out his comrades.  He then asked me if Iwould walk to my old habitation, where he would give me possessionof my own house again, and where I should see they had made butmean improvements.  I walked along with him, but, alas! I could nomore find the place than if I had never been there; for they hadplanted so many trees, and placed them in such a position, so thickand close to one another, and in ten years' time they were grown sobig, that the place was inaccessible, except by such windings andblind ways as they themselves only, who made them, could find.

　　I asked them what put them upon all these fortifications; he toldme I would say there was need enough of it when they had given mean account how they had passed their time since their arriving inthe island, especially after they had the misfortune to find that Iwas gone.  He told me he could not but have some pleasure in mygood fortune, when he heard that I was gone in a good ship, and tomy satisfaction; and that he had oftentimes a strong persuasionthat one time or other he should see me again, but nothing thatever befell him in his life, he said, was so surprising andafflicting to him at first as the disappointment he was under whenhe came back to the island and found I was not there.

　　As to the three barbarians (so he called them) that were leftbehind, and of whom, he said, he had a long story to tell me, theSpaniards all thought themselves much better among the savages,only that their number was so small:  "And," says he, "had theybeen strong enough, we had been all long ago in purgatory;" andwith that he crossed himself on the breast.  "But, sir," says he,"I hope you will not be displeased when I shall tell you how,forced by necessity, we were obliged for our own preservation todisarm them, and make them our subjects, as they would not becontent with being moderately our masters, but would be ourmurderers."  I answered I was afraid of it when I left them there,and nothing troubled me at my parting from the island but that theywere not come back, that I might have put them in possession ofeverything first, and left the others in a state of subjection, asthey deserved; but if they had reduced them to it I was very glad,and should be very far from finding any fault with it; for I knewthey were a parcel of refractory, ungoverned villains, and were fitfor any manner of mischief.

　　While I was saying this, the man came whom he had sent back, andwith him eleven more.  In the dress they were in it was impossibleto guess what nation they were of; but he made all clear, both tothem and to me.  First, he turned to me, and pointing to them,said, "These, sir, are some of the gentlemen who owe their lives toyou;" and then turning to them, and pointing to me, he let themknow who I was; upon which they all came up, one by one, not as ifthey had been sailors, and ordinary fellows, and the like, butreally as if they had been ambassadors or noblemen, and I a monarchor great conqueror:  their behaviour was, to the last degree,obliging and courteous, and yet mixed with a manly, majesticgravity, which very well became them; and, in short, they had somuch more manners than I, that I scarce knew how to receive theircivilities, much less how to return them in kind.

　　The history of their coming to, and conduct in, the island after mygoing away is so very remarkable, and has so many incidents whichthe former part of my relation will help to understand, and whichwill in most of the particulars, refer to the account I havealready given, that I cannot but commit them, with great delight,to the reading of those that come after me.

　　In order to do this as intelligibly as I can, I must go back to thecircumstances in which I left the island, and the persons on it, ofwhom I am to speak.  And first, it is necessary to repeat that Ihad sent away Friday's father and the Spaniard (the two whose livesI had rescued from the savages) in a large canoe to the main, as Ithen thought it, to fetch over the Spaniard's companions that heleft behind him, in order to save them from the like calamity thathe had been in, and in order to succour them for the present; andthat, if possible, we might together find some way for ourdeliverance afterwards.  When I sent them away I had no visibleappearance of, or the least room to hope for, my own deliverance,any more than I had twenty years before - much less had I anyforeknowledge of what afterwards happened, I mean, of an Englishship coming on shore there to fetch me off; and it could not be buta very great surprise to them, when they came back, not only tofind that I was gone, but to find three strangers left on the spot,possessed of all that I had left behind me, which would otherwisehave been their own.

　　The first thing, however, which I inquired into, that I might beginwhere I left off, was of their own part; and I desired the Spaniardwould give me a particular account of his voyage back to hiscountrymen with the boat, when I sent him to fetch them over.  Hetold me there was little variety in that part, for nothingremarkable happened to them on the way, having had very calmweather and a smooth sea.  As for his countrymen, it could not bedoubted, he said, but that they were overjoyed to see him (it seemshe was the principal man among them, the captain of the vessel theyhad been shipwrecked in having been dead some time):  they were, hesaid, the more surprised to see him, because they knew that he wasfallen into the hands of the savages, who, they were satisfied,would devour him as they did all the rest of their prisoners; thatwhen he told them the story of his deliverance, and in what mannerhe was furnished for carrying them away, it was like a dream tothem, and their astonishment, he said, was somewhat like that ofJoseph's brethren when he told them who he was, and the story ofhis exaltation in Pharaoh's court; but when he showed them thearms, the powder, the ball, the provisions that he brought them fortheir journey or voyage, they were restored to themselves, took ajust share of the joy of their deliverance, and immediatelyprepared to come away with him.

　　Their first business was to get canoes; and in this they wereobliged not to stick so much upon the honesty of it, but totrespass upon their friendly savages, and to borrow two largecanoes, or periaguas, on pretence of going out a-fishing, or forpleasure.  In these they came away the next morning.  It seems theywanted no time to get themselves ready; for they had neitherclothes nor provisions, nor anything in the world but what they hadon them, and a few roots to eat, of which they used to make theirbread.  They were in all three weeks absent; and in that time,unluckily for them, I had the occasion offered for my escape, as Imentioned in the other part, and to get off from the island,leaving three of the most impudent, hardened, ungoverned,disagreeable villains behind me that any man could desire to meetwith - to the poor Spaniards' great grief and disappointment.

　　The only just thing the rogues did was, that when the Spaniardscame ashore, they gave my letter to them, and gave them provisions,and other relief, as I had ordered them to do; also they gave themthe long paper of directions which I had left with them, containingthe particular methods which I took for managing every part of mylife there; the way I baked my bread, bred up tame goats, andplanted my corn; how I cured my grapes, made my pots, and, in aword, everything I did.  All this being written down, they gave tothe Spaniards (two of them understood English well enough):  nordid they refuse to accommodate the Spaniards with anything else,for they agreed very well for some time.  They gave them an equaladmission into the house or cave, and they began to live verysociably; and the head Spaniard, who had seen pretty much of mymethods, together with Friday's father, managed all their affairs;but as for the Englishmen, they did nothing but ramble about theisland, shoot parrots, and catch tortoises; and when they came homeat night, the Spaniards provided their suppers for them.

　　The Spaniards would have been satisfied with this had the othersbut let them alone, which, however, they could not find in theirhearts to do long:  but, like the dog in the manger, they would noteat themselves, neither would they let the others eat.  Thedifferences, nevertheless, were at first but trivial, and such asare not worth relating, but at last it broke out into open war:and it began with all the rudeness and insolence that can beimagined - without reason, without provocation, contrary to nature,and indeed to common sense; and though, it is true, the firstrelation of it came from the Spaniards themselves, whom I may callthe accusers, yet when I came to examine the fellows they could notdeny a word of it.

　　But before I come to the particulars of this part, I must supply adefect in my former relation; and this was, I forgot to set downamong the rest, that just as we were weighing the anchor to setsail, there happened a little quarrel on board of our ship, which Iwas once afraid would have turned to a second mutiny; nor was itappeased till the captain, rousing up his courage, and taking usall to his assistance, parted them by force, and making two of themost refractory fellows prisoners, he laid them in irons:  and asthey had been active in the former disorders, and let fall someugly, dangerous words the second time, he threatened to carry themin irons to England, and have them hanged there for mutiny andrunning away with the ship.  This, it seems, though the captain didnot intend to do it, frightened some other men in the ship; andsome of them had put it into the head of the rest that the captainonly gave them good words for the present, till they should come tosame English port, and that then they should be all put into gaol,and tried for their lives.  The mate got intelligence of this, andacquainted us with it, upon which it was desired that I, who stillpassed for a great man among them, should go down with the mate andsatisfy the men, and tell them that they might be assured, if theybehaved well the rest of the voyage, all they had done for the timepast should be pardoned.  So I went, and after passing my honour'sword to them they appeared easy, and the more so when I caused thetwo men that were in irons to be released and forgiven.

　　But this mutiny had brought us to an anchor for that night; thewind also falling calm next morning, we found that our two men whohad been laid in irons had stolen each of them a musket and someother weapons (what powder or shot they had we knew not), and hadtaken the ship's pinnace, which was not yet hauled up, and run awaywith her to their companions in roguery on shore.  As soon as wefound this, I ordered the long-boat on shore, with twelve men andthe mate, and away they went to seek the rogues; but they couldneither find them nor any of the rest, for they all fled into thewoods when they saw the boat coming on shore.  The mate was onceresolved, in justice to their roguery, to have destroyed theirplantations, burned all their household stuff and furniture, andleft them to shift without it; but having no orders, he let it allalone, left everything as he found it, and bringing the pinnaceway, came on board without them.  These two men made their numberfive; but the other three villains were so much more wicked thanthey, that after they had been two or three days together theyturned the two newcomers out of doors to shift for themselves, andwould have nothing to do with them; nor could they for a good whilebe persuaded to give them any food:  as for the Spaniards, theywere not yet come.

　　When the Spaniards came first on shore, the business began to goforward:  the Spaniards would have persuaded the three Englishbrutes to have taken in their countrymen again, that, as they said,they might be all one family; but they would not hear of it, so thetwo poor fellows lived by themselves; and finding nothing butindustry and application would make them live comfortably, theypitched their tents on the north shore of the island, but a littlemore to the west, to be out of danger of the savages, who alwayslanded on the east parts of the island.  Here they built them twohuts, one to lodge in, and the other to lay up their magazines andstores in; and the Spaniards having given them some corn for seed,and some of the peas which I had left them, they dug, planted, andenclosed, after the pattern I had set for them all, and began tolive pretty well.  Their first crop of corn was on the ground; andthough it was but a little bit of land which they had dug up atfirst, having had but a little time, yet it was enough to relievethem, and find them with bread and other eatables; and one of thefellows being the cook's mate of the ship, was very ready at makingsoup, puddings, and such other preparations as the rice and themilk, and such little flesh as they got, furnished him to do.

　　They were going on in this little thriving position when the threeunnatural rogues, their own countrymen too, in mere humour, and toinsult them, came and bullied them, and told them the island wastheirs:  that the governor, meaning me, had given them thepossession of it, and nobody else had any right to it; and thatthey should build no houses upon their ground unless they would payrent for them.  The two men, thinking they were jesting at first,asked them to come in and sit down, and see what fine houses theywere that they had built, and to tell them what rent they demanded;and one of them merrily said if they were the ground-landlords, hehoped if they built tenements upon their land, and madeimprovements, they would, according to the custom of landlords,grant a long lease:  and desired they would get a scrivener to drawthe writings.  One of the three, cursing and raging, told them theyshould see they were not in jest; and going to a little place at adistance, where the honest men had made a fire to dress theirvictuals, he takes a firebrand, and claps it to the outside oftheir hut, and set it on fire:  indeed, it would have been allburned down in a few minutes if one of the two had not run to thefellow, thrust him away, and trod the fire out with his feet, andthat not without some difficulty too.

　　The fellow was in such a rage at the honest man's thrusting himaway, that he returned upon him, with a pole he had in his hand,and had not the man avoided the blow very nimbly, and run into thehut, he had ended his days at once.  His comrade, seeing the dangerthey were both in, ran after him, and immediately they came bothout with their muskets, and the man that was first struck at withthe pole knocked the fellow down that began the quarrel with thestock of his musket, and that before the other two could come tohelp him; and then, seeing the rest come at them, they stoodtogether, and presenting the other ends of their pieces to them,bade them stand off.

　　The others had firearms with them too; but one of the two honestmen, bolder than his comrade, and made desperate by his danger,told them if they offered to move hand or foot they were dead men,and boldly commanded them to lay down their arms.  They did not,indeed, lay down their arms, but seeing him so resolute, it broughtthem to a parley, and they consented to take their wounded man withthem and be gone:  and, indeed, it seems the fellow was woundedsufficiently with the blow.  However, they were much in the wrong,since they had the advantage, that they did not disarm themeffectually, as they might have done, and have gone immediately tothe Spaniards, and given them an account how the rogues had treatedthem; for the three villains studied nothing but revenge, and everyday gave them some intimation that they did so.

　　CHAPTER III - FIGHT WITH CANNIBALS

　　BUT not to crowd this part with an account of the lesser part ofthe rogueries with which they plagued them continually, night andday, it forced the two men to such a desperation that they resolvedto fight them all three, the first time they had a fairopportunity.  In order to do this they resolved to go to the castle(as they called my old dwelling), where the three rogues and theSpaniards all lived together at that time, intending to have a fairbattle, and the Spaniards should stand by to see fair play:  sothey got up in the morning before day, and came to the place, andcalled the Englishmen by their names telling a Spaniard thatanswered that they wanted to speak with them.

　　It happened that the day before two of the Spaniards, having beenin the woods, had seen one of the two Englishmen, whom, fordistinction, I called the honest men, and he had made a sadcomplaint to the Spaniards of the barbarous usage they had met withfrom their three countrymen, and how they had ruined theirplantation, and destroyed their corn, that they had laboured sohard to bring forward, and killed the milch-goat and their threekids, which was all they had provided for their sustenance, andthat if he and his friends, meaning the Spaniards, did not assistthem again, they should be starved.  When the Spaniards came homeat night, and they were all at supper, one of them took the freedomto reprove the three Englishmen, though in very gentle and mannerlyterms, and asked them how they could be so cruel, they beingharmless, inoffensive fellows:  that they were putting themselvesin a way to subsist by their labour, and that it had cost them agreat deal of pains to bring things to such perfection as they werethen in.

　　One of the Englishmen returned very briskly, "What had they to dothere? that they came on shore without leave; and that they shouldnot plant or build upon the island; it was none of their ground.""Why," says the Spaniard, very calmly, "Seignior Inglese, they mustnot starve."  The Englishman replied, like a rough tarpaulin, "Theymight starve; they should not plant nor build in that place."  "Butwhat must they do then, seignior?" said the Spaniard.  Another ofthe brutes returned, "Do? they should be servants, and work forthem."  "But how can you expect that of them?" says the Spaniard;"they are not bought with your money; you have no right to makethem servants."  The Englishman answered, "The island was theirs;the governor had given it to them, and no man had anything to dothere but themselves;" and with that he swore that he would go andburn all their new huts; they should build none upon their land."Why, seignior," says the Spaniard, "by the same rule, we must beyour servants, too."  "Ay," returned the bold dog, "and so youshall, too, before we have done with you;" mixing two or threeoaths in the proper intervals of his speech.  The Spaniard onlysmiled at that, and made him no answer.  However, this littlediscourse had heated them; and starting up, one says to the other.(I think it was he they called Will Atkins), "Come, Jack, let's goand have t'other brush with them; we'll demolish their castle, I'llwarrant you; they shall plant no colony in our dominions."

　　Upon this they were all trooping away, with every man a gun, apistol, and a sword, and muttered some insolent things amongthemselves of what they would do to the Spaniards, too, whenopportunity offered; but the Spaniards, it seems, did not soperfectly understand them as to know all the particulars, only thatin general they threatened them hard for taking the twoEnglishmen's part.  Whither they went, or how they bestowed theirtime that evening, the Spaniards said they did not know; but itseems they wandered about the country part of the night, and themlying down in the place which I used to call my bower, they wereweary and overslept themselves.  The case was this:  they hadresolved to stay till midnight, and so take the two poor men whenthey were asleep, and as they acknowledged afterwards, intended toset fire to their huts while they were in them, and either burnthem there or murder them as they came out.  As malice seldomsleeps very sound, it was very strange they should not have beenkept awake.  However, as the two men had also a design upon them,as I have said, though a much fairer one than that of burning andmurdering, it happened, and very luckily for them all, that theywere up and gone abroad before the bloody-minded rogues came totheir huts.

　　When they came there, and found the men gone, Atkins, who it seemswas the forwardest man, called out to his comrade, "Ha, Jack,here's the nest, but the birds are flown."  They mused a while, tothink what should be the occasion of their being gone abroad sosoon, and suggested presently that the Spaniards had given themnotice of it; and with that they shook hands, and swore to oneanother that they would be revenged of the Spaniards.  As soon asthey had made this bloody bargain they fell to work with the poormen's habitation; they did not set fire, indeed, to anything, butthey pulled down both their houses, and left not the least stickstanding, or scarce any sign on the ground where they stood; theytore all their household stuff in pieces, and threw everythingabout in such a manner, that the poor men afterwards found some oftheir things a mile off.  When they had done this, they pulled upall the young trees which the poor men had planted; broke down anenclosure they had made to secure their cattle and their corn; and,in a word, sacked and plundered everything as completely as a hordeof Tartars would have done.

　　The two men were at this juncture gone to find them out, and hadresolved to fight them wherever they had been, though they were buttwo to three; so that, had they met, there certainly would havebeen blood shed among them, for they were all very stout, resolutefellows, to give them their due.

　　But Providence took more care to keep them asunder than theythemselves could do to meet; for, as if they had dogged oneanother, when the three were gone thither, the two were here; andafterwards, when the two went back to find them, the three werecome to the old habitation again:  we shall see their differentconduct presently.  When the three came back like furiouscreatures, flushed with the rage which the work they had been abouthad put them into, they came up to the Spaniards, and told themwhat they had done, by way of scoff and bravado; and one of themstepping up to one of the Spaniards, as if they had been a coupleof boys at play, takes hold of his hat as it was upon his head, andgiving it a twirl about, fleering in his face, says to him, "Andyou, Seignior Jack Spaniard, shall have the same sauce if you donot mend your manners."  The Spaniard, who, though a quiet civilman, was as brave a man as could be, and withal a strong, well-mademan, looked at him for a good while, and then, having no weapon inhis hand, stepped gravely up to him, and, with one blow of hisfist, knocked him down, as an ox is felled with a pole-axe; atwhich one of the rogues, as insolent as the first, fired his pistolat the Spaniard immediately; he missed his body, indeed, for thebullets went through his hair, but one of them touched the tip ofhis ear, and he bled pretty much.  The blood made the Spaniardbelieve he was more hurt than he really was, and that put him intosome heat, for before he acted all in a perfect calm; but nowresolving to go through with his work, he stooped, and taking thefellow's musket whom he had knocked down, was just going to shootthe man who had fired at him, when the rest of the Spaniards, beingin the cave, came out, and calling to him not to shoot, theystepped in, secured the other two, and took their arms from them.

　　When they were thus disarmed, and found they had made all theSpaniards their enemies, as well as their own countrymen, theybegan to cool, and giving the Spaniards better words, would havetheir arms again; but the Spaniards, considering the feud that wasbetween them and the other two Englishmen, and that it would be thebest method they could take to keep them from killing one another,told them they would do them no harm, and if they would livepeaceably, they would be very willing to assist and associate withthem as they did before; but that they could not think of givingthem their arms again, while they appeared so resolved to domischief with them to their own countrymen, and had even threatenedthem all to make them their servants.

　　The rogues were now quite deaf to all reason, and being refusedtheir arms, they raved away like madmen, threatening what theywould do, though they had no firearms.  But the Spaniards,despising their threatening, told them they should take care howthey offered any injury to their plantation or cattle; for if theydid they would shoot them as they would ravenous beasts, whereverthey found them; and if they fell into their hands alive, theyshould certainly be hanged.  However, this was far from coolingthem, but away they went, raging and swearing like furies.  As soonas they were gone, the two men came back, in passion and rageenough also, though of another kind; for having been at theirplantation, and finding it all demolished and destroyed, as abovementioned, it will easily be supposed they had provocation enough.They could scarce have room to tell their tale, the Spaniards wereso eager to tell them theirs:  and it was strange enough to findthat three men should thus bully nineteen, and receive nopunishment at all.

　　The Spaniards, indeed, despised them, and especially, having thusdisarmed them, made light of their threatenings; but the twoEnglishmen resolved to have their remedy against them, what painssoever it cost to find them out.  But the Spaniards interposed heretoo, and told them that as they had disarmed them, they could notconsent that they (the two) should pursue them with firearms, andperhaps kill them.  "But," said the grave Spaniard, who was theirgovernor, "we will endeavour to make them do you justice, if youwill leave it to us:  for there is no doubt but they will come tous again, when their passion is over, being not able to subsistwithout our assistance.  We promise you to make no peace with themwithout having full satisfaction for you; and upon this conditionwe hope you will promise to use no violence with them, other thanin your own defence."  The two Englishmen yielded to this veryawkwardly, and with great reluctance; but the Spaniards protestedthat they did it only to keep them from bloodshed, and to make themall easy at last.  "For," said they, "we are not so many of us;here is room enough for us all, and it is a great pity that weshould not be all good friends."  At length they did consent, andwaited for the issue of the thing, living for some days with theSpaniards; for their own habitation was destroyed.

　　In about five days' time the vagrants, tired with wandering, andalmost starved with hunger, having chiefly lived on turtles' eggsall that while, came back to the grove; and finding my Spaniard,who, as I have said, was the governor, and two more with him,walking by the side of the creek, they came up in a verysubmissive, humble manner, and begged to be received again into thesociety.  The Spaniards used them civilly, but told them they hadacted so unnaturally to their countrymen, and so very grossly tothemselves, that they could not come to any conclusion withoutconsulting the two Englishmen and the rest; but, however, theywould go to them and discourse about it, and they should know inhalf-an-hour.  It may be guessed that they were very hard put toit; for, as they were to wait this half-hour for an answer, theybegged they would send them out some bread in the meantime, whichthey did, sending at the same time a large piece of goat's fleshand a boiled parrot, which they ate very eagerly.

　　After half-an-hour's consultation they were called in, and a longdebate ensued, their two countrymen charging them with the ruin ofall their labour, and a design to murder them; all which they ownedbefore, and therefore could not deny now.  Upon the whole, theSpaniards acted the moderators between them; and as they hadobliged the two Englishmen not to hurt the three while they werenaked and unarmed, so they now obliged the three to go and rebuildtheir fellows' two huts, one to be of the same and the other oflarger dimensions than they were before; to fence their groundagain, plant trees in the room of those pulled up, dig up the landagain for planting corn, and, in a word, to restore everything tothe same state as they found it, that is, as near as they could.

　　Well, they submitted to all this; and as they had plenty ofprovisions given them all the while, they grew very orderly, andthe whole society began to live pleasantly and agreeably togetheragain; only that these three fellows could never be persuaded towork - I mean for themselves - except now and then a little, justas they pleased.  However, the Spaniards told them plainly that ifthey would but live sociably and friendly together, and study thegood of the whole plantation, they would be content to work forthem, and let them walk about and be as idle as they pleased; andthus, having lived pretty well together for a month or two, theSpaniards let them have arms again, and gave them liberty to goabroad with them as before.

　　It was not above a week after they had these arms, and went abroad,before the ungrateful creatures began to be as insolent andtroublesome as ever.  However, an accident happened presently uponthis, which endangered the safety of them all, and they wereobliged to lay by all private resentments, and look to thepreservation of their lives.

　　It happened one night that the governor, the Spaniard whose life Ihad saved, who was now the governor of the rest, found himself veryuneasy in the night, and could by no means get any sleep:  he wasperfectly well in body, only found his thoughts tumultuous; hismind ran upon men fighting and killing one another; but he wasbroad awake, and could not by any means get any sleep; in short, helay a great while, but growing more and more uneasy, he resolved torise.  As they lay, being so many of them, on goat-skins laid thickupon such couches and pads as they made for themselves, so they hadlittle to do, when they were willing to rise, but to get upon theirfeet, and perhaps put on a coat, such as it was, and their pumps,and they were ready for going any way that their thoughts guidedthem.  Being thus got up, he looked out; but being dark, he couldsee little or nothing, and besides, the trees which I had planted,and which were now grown tall, intercepted his sight, so that hecould only look up, and see that it was a starlight night, andhearing no noise, he returned and lay down again; but to nopurpose; he could not compose himself to anything like rest; buthis thoughts were to the last degree uneasy, and he knew not forwhat.  Having made some noise with rising and walking about, goingout and coming in, another of them waked, and asked who it was thatwas up.  The governor told him how it had been with him.  "Say youso?" says the other Spaniard; "such things are not to be slighted,I assure you; there is certainly some mischief working near us;"and presently he asked him, "Where are the Englishmen?"  "They areall in their huts," says he, "safe enough."  It seems the Spaniardshad kept possession of the main apartment, and had made a place forthe three Englishmen, who, since their last mutiny, were alwaysquartered by themselves, and could not come at the rest.  "Well,"says the Spaniard, "there is something in it, I am persuaded, frommy own experience.  I am satisfied that our spirits embodied have aconverse with and receive intelligence from the spirits unembodied,and inhabiting the invisible world; and this friendly notice isgiven for our advantage, if we knew how to make use of it.  Come,let us go and look abroad; and if we find nothing at all in it tojustify the trouble, I'll tell you a story to the purpose, thatshall convince you of the justice of my proposing it."

　　They went out presently to go up to the top of the hill, where Iused to go; but they being strong, and a good company, nor alone,as I was, used none of my cautions to go up by the ladder, andpulling it up after them, to go up a second stage to the top, butwere going round through the grove unwarily, when they weresurprised with seeing a light as of fire, a very little way fromthem, and hearing the voices of men, not of one or two, but of agreat number.

　　Among the precautions I used to take on the savages landing on theisland, it was my constant care to prevent them making the leastdiscovery of there being any inhabitant upon the place:  and whenby any occasion they came to know it, they felt it so effectuallythat they that got away were scarce able to give any account of it;for we disappeared as soon as possible, nor did ever any that hadseen me escape to tell any one else, except it was the threesavages in our last encounter who jumped into the boat; of whom, Imentioned, I was afraid they should go home and bring more help.Whether it was the consequence of the escape of those men that sogreat a number came now together, or whether they came ignorantly,and by accident, on their usual bloody errand, the Spaniards couldnot understand; but whatever it was, it was their business eitherto have concealed themselves or not to have seen them at all, muchless to have let the savages have seen there were any inhabitantsin the place; or to have fallen upon them so effectually as not aman of them should have escaped, which could only have been bygetting in between them and their boats; but this presence of mindwas wanting to them, which was the ruin of their tranquillity for agreat while.

　　We need not doubt but that the governor and the man with him,surprised with this sight, ran back immediately and raised theirfellows, giving them an account of the imminent danger they wereall in, and they again as readily took the alarm; but it wasimpossible to persuade them to stay close within where they were,but they must all run out to see how things stood.  While it wasdark, indeed, they were safe, and they had opportunity enough forsome hours to view the savages by the light of three fires they hadmade at a distance from one another; what they were doing they knewnot, neither did they know what to do themselves.  For, first, theenemy were too many; and secondly, they did not keep together, butwere divided into several parties, and were on shore in severalplaces.

　　The Spaniards were in no small consternation at this sight; and, asthey found that the fellows went straggling all over the shore,they made no doubt but, first or last, some of them would chop inupon their habitation, or upon some other place where they wouldsee the token of inhabitants; and they were in great perplexityalso for fear of their flock of goats, which, if they should bedestroyed, would have been little less than starving them.  So thefirst thing they resolved upon was to despatch three men awaybefore it was light, two Spaniards and one Englishman, to driveaway all the goats to the great valley where the cave was, and, ifneed were, to drive them into the very cave itself.  Could theyhave seen the savages all together in one body, and at a distancefrom their canoes, they were resolved, if there had been a hundredof them, to attack them; but that could not be done, for they weresome of them two miles off from the other, and, as it appearedafterwards, were of two different nations.

　　After having mused a great while on the course they should take,they resolved at last, while it was still dark, to send the oldsavage, Friday's father, out as a spy, to learn, if possible,something concerning them, as what they came for, what theyintended to do, and the like.  The old man readily undertook it;and stripping himself quite naked, as most of the savages were,away he went.  After he had been gone an hour or two, he bringsword that he had been among them undiscovered, that he found theywere two parties, and of two several nations, who had war with oneanother, and had a great battle in their own country; and that bothsides having had several prisoners taken in the fight, they were,by mere chance, landed all on the same island, for the devouringtheir prisoners and making merry; but their coming so by chance tothe same place had spoiled all their mirth - that they were in agreat rage at one another, and were so near that he believed theywould fight again as soon as daylight began to appear; but he didnot perceive that they had any notion of anybody being on theisland but themselves.  He had hardly made an end of telling hisstory, when they could perceive, by the unusual noise they made,that the two little armies were engaged in a bloody fight.Friday's father used all the arguments he could to persuade ourpeople to lie close, and not be seen; he told them their safetyconsisted in it, and that they had nothing to do but lie still, andthe savages would kill one another to their hands, and then therest would go away; and it was so to a tittle.  But it wasimpossible to prevail, especially upon the Englishmen; theircuriosity was so importunate that they must run out and see thebattle.  However, they used some caution too:  they did not goopenly, just by their own dwelling, but went farther into thewoods, and placed themselves to advantage, where they mightsecurely see them manage the fight, and, as they thought, not beseen by them; but the savages did see them, as we shall findhereafter.

　　The battle was very fierce, and, if I might believe the Englishmen,one of them said he could perceive that some of them were men ofgreat bravery, of invincible spirit, and of great policy in guidingthe fight.  The battle, they said, held two hours before they couldguess which party would be beaten; but then that party which wasnearest our people's habitation began to appear weakest, and aftersome time more some of them began to fly; and this put our menagain into a great consternation, lest any one of those that fledshould run into the grove before their dwelling for shelter, andthereby involuntarily discover the place; and that, by consequence,the pursuers would also do the like in search of them.  Upon this,they resolved that they would stand armed within the wall, andwhoever came into the grove, they resolved to sally out over thewall and kill them, so that, if possible, not one should return togive an account of it; they ordered also that it should be donewith their swords, or by knocking them down with the stocks oftheir muskets, but not by shooting them, for fear of raising analarm by the noise.

　　As they expected it fell out; three of the routed army fled forlife, and crossing the creek, ran directly into the place, not inthe least knowing whither they went, but running as into a thickwood for shelter.  The scout they kept to look abroad gave noticeof this within, with this comforting addition, that the conquerorshad not pursued them, or seen which way they were gone; upon thisthe Spanish governor, a man of humanity, would not suffer them tokill the three fugitives, but sending three men out by the top ofthe hill, ordered them to go round, come in behind them, andsurprise and take them prisoners, which was done.  The residue ofthe conquered people fled to their canoes, and got off to sea; thevictors retired, made no pursuit, or very little, but drawingthemselves into a body together, gave two great screaming shouts,most likely by way of triumph, and so the fight ended; the sameday, about three o'clock in the afternoon, they also marched totheir canoes.  And thus the Spaniards had the island again free tothemselves, their fright was over, and they saw no savages forseveral years after.

　　After they were all gone, the Spaniards came out of their den, andviewing the field of battle, they found about two-and-thirty mendead on the spot; some were killed with long arrows, which werefound sticking in their bodies; but most of them were killed withgreat wooden swords, sixteen or seventeen of which they found inthe field of battle, and as many bows, with a great many arrows.These swords were strange, unwieldy things, and they must be verystrong men that used them; most of those that were killed with themhad their heads smashed to pieces, as we may say, or, as we call itin English, their brains knocked out, and several their arms andlegs broken; so that it is evident they fight with inexpressiblerage and fury.  We found not one man that was not stone dead; foreither they stay by their enemy till they have killed him, or theycarry all the wounded men that are not quite dead away with them.

　　This deliverance tamed our ill-disposed Englishmen for a greatwhile; the sight had filled them with horror, and the consequencesappeared terrible to the last degree, especially upon supposingthat some time or other they should fall into the hands of thosecreatures, who would not only kill them as enemies, but for food,as we kill our cattle; and they professed to me that the thoughtsof being eaten up like beef and mutton, though it was supposed itwas not to be till they were dead, had something in it so horriblethat it nauseated their very stomachs, made them sick when theythought of it, and filled their minds with such unusual terror,that they were not themselves for some weeks after.  This, as Isaid, tamed even the three English brutes I have been speaking of;and for a great while after they were tractable, and went about thecommon business of the whole society well enough - planted, sowed,reaped, and began to be all naturalised to the country.  But sometime after this they fell into such simple measures again asbrought them into a great deal of trouble.

　　They had taken three prisoners, as I observed; and these threebeing stout young fellows, they made them servants, and taught themto work for them, and as slaves they did well enough; but they didnot take their measures as I did by my man Friday, viz. to beginwith them upon the principle of having saved their lives, and theninstruct them in the rational principles of life; much less didthey think of teaching them religion, or attempt civilising andreducing them by kind usage and affectionate arguments.  As theygave them their food every day, so they gave them their work too,and kept them fully employed in drudgery enough; but they failed inthis by it, that they never had them to assist them and fight forthem as I had my man Friday, who was as true to me as the veryflesh upon my bones.

　　But to come to the family part.  Being all now good friends - forcommon danger, as I said above, had effectually reconciled them -they began to consider their general circumstances; and the firstthing that came under consideration was whether, seeing the savagesparticularly haunted that side of the island, and that there weremore remote and retired parts of it equally adapted to their way ofliving, and manifestly to their advantage, they should not rathermove their habitation, and plant in some more proper place fortheir safety, and especially for the security of their cattle andcorn.

　　Upon this, after long debate, it was concluded that they would notremove their habitation; because that, some time or other, theythought they might hear from their governor again, meaning me; andif I should send any one to seek them, I should be sure to directthem to that side, where, if they should find the place demolished,they would conclude the savages had killed us all, and we weregone, and so our supply would go too.  But as to their corn andcattle, they agreed to remove them into the valley where my cavewas, where the land was as proper for both, and where indeed therewas land enough.  However, upon second thoughts they altered onepart of their resolution too, and resolved only to remove part oftheir cattle thither, and part of their corn there; so that if onepart was destroyed the other might be saved.  And one part ofprudence they luckily used:  they never trusted those three savageswhich they had taken prisoners with knowing anything of theplantation they had made in that valley, or of any cattle they hadthere, much less of the cave at that place, which they kept, incase of necessity, as a safe retreat; and thither they carried alsothe two barrels of powder which I had sent them at my coming away.They resolved, however, not to change their habitation; yet, as Ihad carefully covered it first with a wall or fortification, andthen with a grove of trees, and as they were now fully convincedtheir safety consisted entirely in their being concealed, they setto work to cover and conceal the place yet more effectually thanbefore.  For this purpose, as I planted trees, or rather thrust instakes, which in time all grew up to be trees, for some gooddistance before the entrance into my apartments, they went on inthe same manner, and filled up the rest of that whole space ofground from the trees I had set quite down to the side of thecreek, where I landed my floats, and even into the very ooze wherethe tide flowed, not so much as leaving any place to land, or anysign that there had been any landing thereabouts:  these stakesalso being of a wood very forward to grow, they took care to havethem generally much larger and taller than those which I hadplanted.  As they grew apace, they planted them so very thick andclose together, that when they had been three or four years grownthere was no piercing with the eye any considerable way into theplantation.  As for that part which I had planted, the trees weregrown as thick as a man's thigh, and among them they had placed somany other short ones, and so thick, that it stood like a palisadoa quarter of a mile thick, and it was next to impossible topenetrate it, for a little dog could hardly get between the trees,they stood so close.

　　But this was not all; for they did the same by all the ground tothe right hand and to the left, and round even to the side of thehill, leaving no way, not so much as for themselves, to come outbut by the ladder placed up to the side of the hill, and thenlifted up, and placed again from the first stage up to the top:  sothat when the ladder was taken down, nothing but what had wings orwitchcraft to assist it could come at them.  This was excellentlywell contrived:  nor was it less than what they afterwards foundoccasion for, which served to convince me, that as human prudencehas the authority of Providence to justify it, so it has doubtlessthe direction of Providence to set it to work; and if we listenedcarefully to the voice of it, I am persuaded we might prevent manyof the disasters which our lives are now, by our own negligence,subjected to.

　　They lived two years after this in perfect retirement, and had nomore visits from the savages.  They had, indeed, an alarm giventhem one morning, which put them into a great consternation; forsome of the Spaniards being out early one morning on the west sideor end of the island (which was that end where I never went, forfear of being discovered), they were surprised with seeing abouttwenty canoes of Indians just coming on shore.  They made the bestof their way home in hurry enough; and giving the alarm to theircomrades, they kept close all that day and the next, going out onlyat night to make their observation:  but they had the good luck tobe undiscovered, for wherever the savages went, they did not landthat time on the island, but pursued some other design.

　　CHAPTER IV - RENEWED INVASION OF SAVAGES

　　AND now they had another broil with the three Englishmen; one ofwhom, a most turbulent fellow, being in a rage at one of the threecaptive slaves, because the fellow had not done something rightwhich he bade him do, and seemed a little untractable in hisshowing him, drew a hatchet out of a frog-belt which he wore by hisside, and fell upon the poor savage, not to correct him, but tokill him.  One of the Spaniards who was by, seeing him give thefellow a barbarous cut with the hatchet, which he aimed at hishead, but stuck into his shoulder, so that he thought he had cutthe poor creature's arm off, ran to him, and entreating him not tomurder the poor man, placed himself between him and the savage, toprevent the mischief.  The fellow, being enraged the more at this,struck at the Spaniard with his hatchet, and swore he would servehim as he intended to serve the savage; which the Spaniardperceiving, avoided the blow, and with a shovel, which he had inhis hand (for they were all working in the field about their cornland), knocked the brute down.  Another of the Englishmen, runningup at the same time to help his comrade, knocked the Spaniard down;and then two Spaniards more came in to help their man, and a thirdEnglishman fell in upon them.  They had none of them any firearmsor any other weapons but hatchets and other tools, except thisthird Englishman; he had one of my rusty cutlasses, with which hemade at the two last Spaniards, and wounded them both.  This frayset the whole family in an uproar, and more help coming in theytook the three Englishmen prisoners.  The next question was, whatshould be done with them?  They had been so often mutinous, andwere so very furious, so desperate, and so idle withal, they knewnot what course to take with them, for they were mischievous to thehighest degree, and cared not what hurt they did to any man; sothat, in short, it was not safe to live with them.

　　The Spaniard who was governor told them, in so many words, that ifthey had been of his own country he would have hanged them; for alllaws and all governors were to preserve society, and those who weredangerous to the society ought to be expelled out of it; but asthey were Englishmen, and that it was to the generous kindness ofan Englishman that they all owed their preservation anddeliverance, he would use them with all possible lenity, and wouldleave them to the judgment of the other two Englishmen, who weretheir countrymen.  One of the two honest Englishmen stood up, andsaid they desired it might not be left to them.  "For," says he, "Iam sure we ought to sentence them to the gallows;" and with that hegives an account how Will Atkins, one of the three, had proposed tohave all the five Englishmen join together and murder all theSpaniards when they were in their sleep.

　　When the Spanish governor heard this, he calls to Will Atkins,"How, Seignior Atkins, would you murder us all?  What have you tosay to that?"  The hardened villain was so far from denying it,that he said it was true, and swore they would do it still beforethey had done with them.  "Well, but Seignior Atkins," says theSpaniard, "what have we done to you that you will kill us?  Whatwould you get by killing us?  And what must we do to prevent youkilling us?  Must we kill you, or you kill us?  Why will you put usto the necessity of this, Seignior Atkins?" says the Spaniard verycalmly, and smiling.  Seignior Atkins was in such a rage at theSpaniard's making a jest of it, that, had he not been held by threemen, and withal had no weapon near him, it was thought he wouldhave attempted to kill the Spaniard in the middle of all thecompany.  This hare-brained carriage obliged them to considerseriously what was to be done.  The two Englishmen and the Spaniardwho saved the poor savage were of the opinion that they should hangone of the three for an example to the rest, and that particularlyit should be he that had twice attempted to commit murder with hishatchet; indeed, there was some reason to believe he had done it,for the poor savage was in such a miserable condition with thewound he had received that it was thought he could not live.  Butthe governor Spaniard still said No; it was an Englishman that hadsaved all their lives, and he would never consent to put anEnglishman to death, though he had murdered half of them; nay, hesaid if he had been killed himself by an Englishman, and had timeleft to speak, it should be that they should pardon him.

　　This was so positively insisted on by the governor Spaniard, thatthere was no gainsaying it; and as merciful counsels are most aptto prevail where they are so earnestly pressed, so they all cameinto it.  But then it was to be considered what should be done tokeep them from doing the mischief they designed; for all agreed,governor and all, that means were to be used for preserving thesociety from danger.  After a long debate, it was agreed that theyshould be disarmed, and not permitted to have either gun, powder,shot, sword, or any weapon; that they should be turned out of thesociety, and left to live where they would and how they would, bythemselves; but that none of the rest, either Spaniards or English,should hold any kind of converse with them, or have anything to dowith them; that they should be forbid to come within a certaindistance of the place where the rest dwelt; and if they offered tocommit any disorder, so as to spoil, burn, kill, or destroy any ofthe corn, plantings, buildings, fences, or cattle belonging to thesociety, they should die without mercy, and they would shoot themwherever they could find them.

　　The humane governor, musing upon the sentence, considered a littleupon it; and turning to the two honest Englishmen, said, "Hold; youmust reflect that it will be long ere they can raise corn andcattle of their own, and they must not starve; we must thereforeallow them provisions."  So he caused to be added, that they shouldhave a proportion of corn given them to last them eight months, andfor seed to sow, by which time they might be supposed to raise someof their own; that they should have six milch-goats, four he-goats,and six kids given them, as well for present subsistence as for astore; and that they should have tools given them for their work inthe fields, but they should have none of these tools or provisionsunless they would swear solemnly that they would not hurt or injureany of the Spaniards with them, or of their fellow-Englishmen.

　　Thus they dismissed them the society, and turned them out to shiftfor themselves.  They went away sullen and refractory, as neithercontent to go away nor to stay:  but, as there was no remedy, theywent, pretending to go and choose a place where they would settlethemselves; and some provisions were given them, but no weapons.About four or five days after, they came again for some victuals,and gave the governor an account where they had pitched theirtents, and marked themselves out a habitation and plantation; andit was a very convenient place indeed, on the remotest part of theisland, NE., much about the place where I providentially landed inmy first voyage, when I was driven out to sea in my foolish attemptto sail round the island.

　　Here they built themselves two handsome huts, and contrived them ina manner like my first habitation, being close under the side of ahill, having some trees already growing on three sides of it, sothat by planting others it would be very easily covered from thesight, unless narrowly searched for.  They desired some dried goat-skins for beds and covering, which were given them; and upon givingtheir words that they would not disturb the rest, or injure any oftheir plantations, they gave them hatchets, and what other toolsthey could spare; some peas, barley, and rice, for sowing; and, ina word, anything they wanted, except arms and ammunition.

　　They lived in this separate condition about six months, and had gotin their first harvest, though the quantity was but small, theparcel of land they had planted being but little.  Indeed, havingall their plantation to form, they had a great deal of work upontheir hands; and when they came to make boards and pots, and suchthings, they were quite out of their element, and could makenothing of it; therefore when the rainy season came on, for want ofa cave in the earth, they could not keep their grain dry, and itwas in great danger of spoiling.  This humbled them much:  so theycame and begged the Spaniards to help them, which they very readilydid; and in four days worked a great hole in the side of the hillfor them, big enough to secure their corn and other things from therain:  but it was a poor place at best compared to mine, andespecially as mine was then, for the Spaniards had greatly enlargedit, and made several new apartments in it.

　　About three quarters of a year after this separation, a new frolictook these rogues, which, together with the former villainy theyhad committed, brought mischief enough upon them, and had very nearbeen the ruin of the whole colony.  The three new associates began,it seems, to be weary of the laborious life they led, and thatwithout hope of bettering their circumstances:  and a whim tookthem that they would make a voyage to the continent, from whencethe savages came, and would try if they could seize upon someprisoners among the natives there, and bring them home, so as tomake them do the laborious part of the work for them.

　　The project was not so preposterous, if they had gone no further.But they did nothing, and proposed nothing, but had either mischiefin the design, or mischief in the event.  And if I may give myopinion, they seemed to be under a blast from Heaven:  for if wewill not allow a visible curse to pursue visible crimes, how shallwe reconcile the events of things with the divine justice?  It wascertainly an apparent vengeance on their crime of mutiny and piracythat brought them to the state they were in; and they showed notthe least remorse for the crime, but added new villanies to it,such as the piece of monstrous cruelty of wounding a poor slavebecause he did not, or perhaps could not, understand to do what hewas directed, and to wound him in such a manner as made him acripple all his life, and in a place where no surgeon or medicinecould be had for his cure; and, what was still worse, theintentional murder, for such to be sure it was, as was afterwardsthe formed design they all laid to murder the Spaniards in coldblood, and in their sleep.

　　The three fellows came down to the Spaniards one morning, and invery humble terms desired to be admitted to speak with them.  TheSpaniards very readily heard what they had to say, which was this:that they were tired of living in the manner they did, and thatthey were not handy enough to make the necessaries they wanted, andthat having no help, they found they should be starved; but if theSpaniards would give them leave to take one of the canoes whichthey came over in, and give them arms and ammunition proportionedto their defence, they would go over to the main, and seek theirfortunes, and so deliver them from the trouble of supplying themwith any other provisions.

　　The Spaniards were glad enough to get rid of them, but veryhonestly represented to them the certain destruction they wererunning into; told them they had suffered such hardships upon thatvery spot, that they could, without any spirit of prophecy, tellthem they would be starved or murdered, and bade them consider ofit.  The men replied audaciously, they should be starved if theystayed here, for they could not work, and would not work, and theycould but be starved abroad; and if they were murdered, there wasan end of them; they had no wives or children to cry after them;and, in short, insisted importunately upon their demand, declaringthey would go, whether they gave them any arms or not.

　　The Spaniards told them, with great kindness, that if they wereresolved to go they should not go like naked men, and be in nocondition to defend themselves; and that though they could illspare firearms, not having enough for themselves, yet they wouldlet them have two muskets, a pistol, and a cutlass, and each man ahatchet, which they thought was sufficient for them.  In a word,they accepted the offer; and having baked bread enough to servethem a month given them, and as much goats' flesh as they could eatwhile it was sweet, with a great basket of dried grapes, a pot offresh water, and a young kid alive, they boldly set out in thecanoe for a voyage over the sea, where it was at least forty milesbroad.  The boat, indeed, was a large one, and would very well havecarried fifteen or twenty men, and therefore was rather too big forthem to manage; but as they had a fair breeze and flood-tide withthem, they did well enough.  They had made a mast of a long pole,and a sail of four large goat-skins dried, which they had sewed orlaced together; and away they went merrily together.  The Spaniardscalled after them "BON VOYAJO;" and no man ever thought of seeingthem any more.

　　The Spaniards were often saying to one another, and to the twohonest Englishmen who remained behind, how quietly and comfortablythey lived, now these three turbulent fellows were gone.  As fortheir coming again, that was the remotest thing from their thoughtsthat could be imagined; when, behold, after two-and-twenty days'absence, one of the Englishmen being abroad upon his planting work,sees three strange men coming towards him at a distance, with gunsupon their shoulders.

　　Away runs the Englishman, frightened and amazed, as if he wasbewitched, to the governor Spaniard, and tells him they were allundone, for there were strangers upon the island, but he could nottell who they were.  The Spaniard, pausing a while, says to him,"How do you mean - you cannot tell who?  They are the savages, tobe sure."  "No, no," says the Englishman, "they are men in clothes,with arms."  "Nay, then," says the Spaniard, "why are you soconcerned!  If they are not savages they must be friends; for thereis no Christian nation upon earth but will do us good rather thanharm."  While they were debating thus, came up the threeEnglishmen, and standing without the wood, which was new planted,hallooed to them.  They presently knew their voices, and so all thewonder ceased.  But now the admiration was turned upon anotherquestion - What could be the matter, and what made them come backagain?

　　It was not long before they brought the men in, and inquiring wherethey had been, and what they had been doing, they gave them a fullaccount of their voyage in a few words:  that they reached the landin less than two days, but finding the people alarmed at theircoming, and preparing with bows and arrows to fight them, theydurst not go on, shore, but sailed on to the northward six or sevenhours, till they came to a great opening, by which they perceivedthat the land they saw from our island was not the main, but anisland:  that upon entering that opening of the sea they sawanother island on the right hand north, and several more west; andbeing resolved to land somewhere, they put over to one of theislands which lay west, and went boldly on shore; that they foundthe people very courteous and friendly to them; and they gave themseveral roots and some dried fish, and appeared very sociable; andthat the women, as well as the men, were very forward to supplythem with anything they could get for them to eat, and brought itto them a great way, on their heads.  They continued here for fourdays, and inquired as well as they could of them by signs, whatnations were this way, and that way, and were told of severalfierce and terrible people that lived almost every way, who, asthey made known by signs to them, used to eat men; but, as forthemselves, they said they never ate men or women, except only suchas they took in the wars; and then they owned they made a greatfeast, and ate their prisoners.

　　The Englishmen inquired when they had had a feast of that kind; andthey told them about two moons ago, pointing to the moon and to twofingers; and that their great king had two hundred prisoners now,which he had taken in his war, and they were feeding them to makethem fat for the next feast.  The Englishmen seemed mighty desirousof seeing those prisoners; but the others mistaking them, thoughtthey were desirous to have some of them to carry away for their owneating.  So they beckoned to them, pointing to the setting of thesun, and then to the rising; which was to signify that the nextmorning at sunrising they would bring some for them; andaccordingly the next morning they brought down five women andeleven men, and gave them to the Englishmen to carry with them ontheir voyage, just as we would bring so many cows and oxen down toa seaport town to victual a ship.

　　As brutish and barbarous as these fellows were at home, theirstomachs turned at this sight, and they did not know what to do.To refuse the prisoners would have been the highest affront to thesavage gentry that could be offered them, and what to do with themthey knew not.  However, after some debate, they resolved to acceptof them:  and, in return, they gave the savages that brought themone of their hatchets, an old key, a knife, and six or seven oftheir bullets; which, though they did not understand their use,they seemed particularly pleased with; and then tying the poorcreatures' hands behind them, they dragged the prisoners into theboat for our men.

　　The Englishmen were obliged to come away as soon as they had them,or else they that gave them this noble present would certainly haveexpected that they should have gone to work with them, have killedtwo or three of them the next morning, and perhaps have invited thedonors to dinner.  But having taken their leave, with all therespect and thanks that could well pass between people, where oneither side they understood not one word they could say, they putoff with their boat, and came back towards the first island; where,when they arrived, they set eight of their prisoners at liberty,there being too many of them for their occasion.  In their voyagethey endeavoured to have some communication with their prisoners;but it was impossible to make them understand anything.  Nothingthey could say to them, or give them, or do for them, but waslooked upon as going to murder them.  They first of all unboundthem; but the poor creatures screamed at that, especially thewomen, as if they had just felt the knife at their throats; forthey immediately concluded they were unbound on purpose to bekilled.  If they gave them thing to eat, it was the same thing;they then concluded it was for fear they should sink in flesh, andso not be fat enough to kill.  If they looked at one of them moreparticularly, the party presently concluded it was to see whetherhe or she was fattest, and fittest to kill first; nay, after theyhad brought them quite over, and began to use them kindly, andtreat them well, still they expected every day to make a dinner orsupper for their new masters.

　　When the three wanderers had give this unaccountable history orjournal of their voyage, the Spaniard asked them where their newfamily was; and being told that they had brought them on shore, andput them into one of their huts, and were come up to beg somevictuals for them, they (the Spaniards) and the other twoEnglishmen, that is to say, the whole colony, resolved to go alldown to the place and see them; and did so, and Friday's fatherwith them.  When they came into the hut, there they sat, all bound;for when they had brought them on shore they bound their hands thatthey might not take the boat and make their escape; there, I say,they sat, all of them stark naked.  First, there were three comelyfellows, well shaped, with straight limbs, about thirty to thirty-five years of age; and five women, whereof two might be from thirtyto forty, two more about four or five and twenty; and the fifth, atall, comely maiden, about seventeen.  The women were well-favoured, agreeable persons, both in shape and features, onlytawny; and two of them, had they been perfect white, would havepassed for very handsome women, even in London, having pleasantcountenances, and of a very modest behaviour; especially when theycame afterwards to be clothed and dressed, though that dress wasvery indifferent, it must be confessed.

　　The sight, you may be sure, was something uncouth to our Spaniards,who were, to give them a just character, men of the most calm,sedate tempers, and perfect good humour, that ever I met with:and, in particular, of the utmost modesty:  I say, the sight wasvery uncouth, to see three naked men and five naked women, alltogether bound, and in the most miserable circumstances that humannature could be supposed to be, viz. to be expecting every momentto be dragged out and have their brains knocked out, and then to beeaten up like a calf that is killed for a dainty.

　　The first thing they did was to cause the old Indian, Friday'sfather, to go in, and see first if he knew any of them, and then ifhe understood any of their speech.  As soon as the old man came in,he looked seriously at them, but knew none of them; neither couldany of them understand a word he said, or a sign he could make,except one of the women.  However, this was enough to answer theend, which was to satisfy them that the men into whose hands theywere fallen were Christians; that they abhorred eating men orwomen; and that they might be sure they would not be killed.  Assoon as they were assured of this, they discovered such a joy, andby such awkward gestures, several ways, as is hard to describe; forit seems they were of several nations.  The woman who was theirinterpreter was bid, in the next place, to ask them if they werewilling to be servants, and to work for the men who had broughtthem away, to save their lives; at which they all fell a-dancing;and presently one fell to taking up this, and another that,anything that lay next, to carry on their shoulders, to intimatethey were willing to work.

　　The governor, who found that the having women among them wouldpresently be attended with some inconvenience, and might occasionsome strife, and perhaps blood, asked the three men what theyintended to do with these women, and how they intended to use them,whether as servants or as wives?  One of the Englishmen answered,very boldly and readily, that they would use them as both; to whichthe governor said:  "I am not going to restrain you from it - youare your own masters as to that; but this I think is but just, foravoiding disorders and quarrels among you, and I desire it of youfor that reason only, viz. that you will all engage, that if any ofyou take any of these women as a wife, he shall take but one; andthat having taken one, none else shall touch her; for though wecannot marry any one of you, yet it is but reasonable that, whileyou stay here, the woman any of you takes shall be maintained bythe man that takes her, and should be his wife - I mean," says he,"while he continues here, and that none else shall have anything todo with her."  All this appeared so just, that every one agreed toit without any difficulty.

　　Then the Englishmen asked the Spaniards if they designed to takeany of them?  But every one of them answered "No."  Some of themsaid they had wives in Spain, and the others did not like womenthat were not Christians; and all together declared that they wouldnot touch one of them, which was an instance of such virtue as Ihave not met with in all my travels.  On the other hand, the fiveEnglishmen took them every one a wife, that is to say, a temporarywife; and so they set up a new form of living; for the Spaniardsand Friday's father lived in my old habitation, which they hadenlarged exceedingly within.  The three servants which were takenin the last battle of the savages lived with them; and thesecarried on the main part of the colony, supplied all the rest withfood, and assisted them in anything as they could, or as they foundnecessity required.

　　But the wonder of the story was, how five such refractory, ill-matched fellows should agree about these women, and that some twoof them should not choose the same woman, especially seeing two orthree of them were, without comparison, more agreeable than theothers; but they took a good way enough to prevent quarrellingamong themselves, for they set the five women by themselves in oneof their huts, and they went all into the other hut, and drew lotsamong them who should choose first.

　　Him that drew to choose first went away by himself to the hut wherethe poor naked creatures were, and fetched out her he chose; and itwas worth observing, that he that chose first took her that wasreckoned the homeliest and oldest of the five, which made mirthenough amongst the rest; and even the Spaniards laughed at it; butthe fellow considered better than any of them, that it wasapplication and business they were to expect assistance in, as muchas in anything else; and she proved the best wife of all theparcel.

　　When the poor women saw themselves set in a row thus, and fetchedout one by one, the terrors of their condition returned upon themagain, and they firmly believed they were now going to be devoured.Accordingly, when the English sailor came in and fetched out one ofthem, the rest set up a most lamentable cry, and hung about her,and took their leave of her with such agonies and affection aswould have grieved the hardest heart in the world:  nor was itpossible for the Englishmen to satisfy them that they were not tobe immediately murdered, till they fetched the old man, Friday'sfather, who immediately let them know that the five men, who wereto fetch them out one by one, had chosen them for their wives.When they had done, and the fright the women were in was a littleover, the men went to work, and the Spaniards came and helped them:and in a few hours they had built them every one a new hut or tentfor their lodging apart; for those they had already were crowdedwith their tools, household stuff, and provisions.  The threewicked ones had pitched farthest off, and the two honest onesnearer, but both on the north shore of the island, so that theycontinued separated as before; and thus my island was peopled inthree places, and, as I might say, three towns were begun to bebuilt.

　　And here it is very well worth observing that, as it often happensin the world (what the wise ends in God's providence are, in such adisposition of things, I cannot say), the two honest fellows hadthe two worst wives; and the three reprobates, that were scarceworth hanging, that were fit for nothing, and neither seemed bornto do themselves good nor any one else, had three clever, careful,and ingenious wives; not that the first two were bad wives as totheir temper or humour, for all the five were most willing, quiet,passive, and subjected creatures, rather like slaves than wives;but my meaning is, they were not alike capable, ingenious, orindustrious, or alike cleanly and neat.  Another observation I mustmake, to the honour of a diligent application on one hand, and tothe disgrace of a slothful, negligent, idle temper on the other,that when I came to the place, and viewed the several improvements,plantings, and management of the several little colonies, the twomen had so far out-gone the three, that there was no comparison.They had, indeed, both of them as much ground laid out for corn asthey wanted, and the reason was, because, according to my rule,nature dictated that it was to no purpose to sow more corn thanthey wanted; but the difference of the cultivation, of theplanting, of the fences, and indeed, of everything else, was easyto be seen at first view.

　　The two men had innumerable young trees planted about their huts,so that, when you came to the place, nothing was to be seen but awood; and though they had twice had their plantation demolished,once by their own countrymen, and once by the enemy, as shall beshown in its place, yet they had restored all again, and everythingwas thriving and flourishing about them; they had grapes planted inorder, and managed like a vineyard, though they had themselvesnever seen anything of that kind; and by their good ordering theirvines, their grapes were as good again as any of the others.  Theyhad also found themselves out a retreat in the thickest part of thewoods, where, though there was not a natural cave, as I had found,yet they made one with incessant labour of their hands, and where,when the mischief which followed happened, they secured their wivesand children so as they could never be found; they having, bysticking innumerable stakes and poles of the wood which, as I said,grew so readily, made the grove impassable, except in some places,when they climbed up to get over the outside part, and then went onby ways of their own leaving.

　　As to the three reprobates, as I justly call them, though they weremuch civilised by their settlement compared to what they werebefore, and were not so quarrelsome, having not the sameopportunity; yet one of the certain companions of a profligate mindnever left them, and that was their idleness.  It is true, theyplanted corn and made fences; but Solomon's words were never betterverified than in them, "I went by the vineyard of the slothful, andit was all overgrown with thorns":  for when the Spaniards came toview their crop they could not see it in some places for weeds, thehedge had several gaps in it, where the wild goats had got in andeaten up the corn; perhaps here and there a dead bush was crammedin, to stop them out for the present, but it was only shutting thestable-door after the steed was stolen.  Whereas, when they lookedon the colony of the other two, there was the very face of industryand success upon all they did; there was not a weed to be seen inall their corn, or a gap in any of their hedges; and they, on theother hand, verified Solomon's words in another place, "that thediligent hand maketh rich"; for everything grew and thrived, andthey had plenty within and without; they had more tame cattle thanthe others, more utensils and necessaries within doors, and yetmore pleasure and diversion too.

　　It is true, the wives of the three were very handy and cleanlywithin doors; and having learned the English ways of dressing, andcooking from one of the other Englishmen, who, as I said, was acook's mate on board the ship, they dressed their husbands'victuals very nicely and well; whereas the others could not bebrought to understand it; but then the husband, who, as I say, hadbeen cook's mate, did it himself.  But as for the husbands of thethree wives, they loitered about, fetched turtles' eggs, and caughtfish and birds:  in a word, anything but labour; and they faredaccordingly.  The diligent lived well and comfortably, and theslothful hard and beggarly; and so, I believe, generally speaking,it is all over the world.

　　But I now come to a scene different from all that had happenedbefore, either to them or to me; and the origin of the story wasthis:  Early one morning there came on shore five or six canoes ofIndians or savages, call them which you please, and there is noroom to doubt they came upon the old errand of feeding upon theirslaves; but that part was now so familiar to the Spaniards, and toour men too, that they did not concern themselves about it, as Idid:  but having been made sensible, by their experience, thattheir only business was to lie concealed, and that if they were notseen by any of the savages they would go off again quietly, whentheir business was done, having as yet not the least notion ofthere being any inhabitants in the island; I say, having been madesensible of this, they had nothing to do but to give notice to allthe three plantations to keep within doors, and not showthemselves, only placing a scout in a proper place, to give noticewhen the boats went to sea again.

　　This was, without doubt, very right; but a disaster spoiled allthese measures, and made it known among the savages that there wereinhabitants there; which was, in the end, the desolation of almostthe whole colony.  After the canoes with the savages were gone off,the Spaniards peeped abroad again; and some of them had thecuriosity to go to the place where they had been, to see what theyhad been doing.  Here, to their great surprise, they found threesavages left behind, and lying fast asleep upon the ground.  It wassupposed they had either been so gorged with their inhuman feast,that, like beasts, they were fallen asleep, and would not stir whenthe others went, or they had wandered into the woods, and did notcome back in time to be taken in.

　　The Spaniards were greatly surprised at this sight and perfectly ata loss what to do.  The Spaniard governor, as it happened, was withthem, and his advice was asked, but he professed he knew not whatto do.  As for slaves, they had enough already; and as to killingthem, there were none of them inclined to do that:  the Spaniardgovernor told me they could not think of shedding innocent blood;for as to them, the poor creatures had done them no wrong, invadednone of their property, and they thought they had no just quarrelagainst them, to take away their lives.  And here I must, injustice to these Spaniards, observe that, let the accounts ofSpanish cruelty in Mexico and Peru be what they will, I never metwith seventeen men of any nation whatsoever, in any foreigncountry, who were so universally modest, temperate, virtuous, sovery good-humoured, and so courteous, as these Spaniards:  and asto cruelty, they had nothing of it in their very nature; noinhumanity, no barbarity, no outrageous passions; and yet all ofthem men of great courage and spirit.  Their temper and calmnesshad appeared in their bearing the insufferable usage of the threeEnglishmen; and their justice and humanity appeared now in the caseof the savages above.  After some consultation they resolved uponthis; that they would lie still a while longer, till, if possible,these three men might be gone.  But then the governor recollectedthat the three savages had no boat; and if they were left to roveabout the island, they would certainly discover that there wereinhabitants in it; and so they should be undone that way.  Uponthis, they went back again, and there lay the fellows fast asleepstill, and so they resolved to awaken them, and take themprisoners; and they did so.  The poor fellows were strangelyfrightened when they were seized upon and bound; and afraid, likethe women, that they should be murdered and eaten:  for it seemsthose people think all the world does as they do, in eating men'sflesh; but they were soon made easy as to that, and away theycarried them.

　　It was very happy for them that they did not carry them home to thecastle, I mean to my palace under the hill; but they carried themfirst to the bower, where was the chief of their country work, suchas the keeping the goats, the planting the corn, &c.; and afterwardthey carried them to the habitation of the two Englishmen.  Herethey were set to work, though it was not much they had for them todo; and whether it was by negligence in guarding them, or that theythought the fellows could not mend themselves, I know not, but oneof them ran away, and, taking to the woods, they could never hearof him any more.  They had good reason to believe he got home againsoon after in some other boats or canoes of savages who came onshore three or four weeks afterwards, and who, carrying on theirrevels as usual, went off in two days' time.  This thoughtterrified them exceedingly; for they concluded, and that notwithout good cause indeed, that if this fellow came home safe amonghis comrades, he would certainly give them an account that therewere people in the island, and also how few and weak they were; forthis savage, as observed before, had never been told, and it wasvery happy he had not, how many there were or where they lived; norhad he ever seen or heard the fire of any of their guns, much lesshad they shown him any of their other retired places; such as thecave in the valley, or the new retreat which the two Englishmen hadmade, and the like.

　　The first testimony they had that this fellow had givenintelligence of them was, that about two mouths after this sixcanoes of savages, with about seven, eight, or ten men in a canoe,came rowing along the north side of the island, where they neverused to come before, and landed, about an hour after sunrise, at aconvenient place, about a mile from the habitation of the twoEnglishmen, where this escaped man had been kept.  As the chiefSpaniard said, had they been all there the damage would not havebeen so much, for not a man of them would have escaped; but thecase differed now very much, for two men to fifty was too muchodds.  The two men had the happiness to discover them about aleague off, so that it was above an hour before they landed; and asthey landed a mile from their huts, it was some time before theycould come at them.  Now, having great reason to believe that theywere betrayed, the first thing they did was to bind the two slaveswhich were left, and cause two of the three men whom they broughtwith the women (who, it seems, proved very faithful to them) tolead them, with their two wives, and whatever they could carry awaywith them, to their retired places in the woods, which I havespoken of above, and there to bind the two fellows hand and foot,till they heard farther.  In the next place, seeing the savageswere all come on shore, and that they had bent their coursedirectly that way, they opened the fences where the milch cows werekept, and drove them all out; leaving their goats to straggle inthe woods, whither they pleased, that the savages might think theywere all bred wild; but the rogue who came with them was toocunning for that, and gave them an account of it all, for they wentdirectly to the place.

　　When the two poor frightened men had secured their wives and goods,they sent the other slave they had of the three who came with thewomen, and who was at their place by accident, away to theSpaniards with all speed, to give them the alarm, and desire speedyhelp, and, in the meantime, they took their arms and whatammunition they had, and retreated towards the place in the woodwhere their wives were sent; keeping at a distance, yet so thatthey might see, if possible, which way the savages took.  They hadnot gone far but that from a rising ground they could see thelittle army of their enemies come on directly to their habitation,and, in a moment more, could see all their huts and household stuffflaming up together, to their great grief and mortification; forthis was a great loss to them, irretrievable, indeed, for sometime.  They kept their station for a while, till they found thesavages, like wild beasts, spread themselves all over the place,rummaging every way, and every place they could think of, in searchof prey; and in particular for the people, of whom now it plainlyappeared they had intelligence.

　　The two Englishmen seeing this, thinking themselves not securewhere they stood, because it was likely some of the wild peoplemight come that way, and they might come too many together, thoughtit proper to make another retreat about half a mile farther;believing, as it afterwards happened, that the further theystrolled, the fewer would be together.  Their next halt was at theentrance into a very thick-grown part of the woods, and where anold trunk of a tree stood, which was hollow and very large; and inthis tree they both took their standing, resolving to see therewhat might offer.  They had not stood there long before two of thesavages appeared running directly that way, as if they had alreadyhad notice where they stood, and were coming up to attack them; anda little way farther they espied three more coming after them, andfive more beyond them, all coming the same way; besides which, theysaw seven or eight more at a distance, running another way; for ina word, they ran every way, like sportsmen beating for their game.

　　The poor men were now in great perplexity whether they should standand keep their posture or fly; but after a very short debate withthemselves, they considered that if the savages ranged the countrythus before help came, they might perhaps find their retreat in thewoods, and then all would be lost; so they resolved to stand themthere, and if they were too many to deal with, then they would getup to the top of the tree, from whence they doubted not to defendthemselves, fire excepted, as long as their ammunition lasted,though all the savages that were landed, which was near fifty, wereto attack them.

　　Having resolved upon this, they next considered whether they shouldfire at the first two, or wait for the three, and so take themiddle party, by which the two and the five that followed would beseparated; at length they resolved to let the first two pass by,unless they should spy them the tree, and come to attack them.  Thefirst two savages confirmed them also in this resolution, byturning a little from them towards another part of the wood; butthe three, and the five after them, came forward directly to thetree, as if they had known the Englishmen were there.  Seeing themcome so straight towards them, they resolved to take them in a lineas they came:  and as they resolved to fire but one at a time,perhaps the first shot might hit them all three; for which purposethe man who was to fire put three or four small bullets into hispiece; and having a fair loophole, as it were, from a broken holein the tree, he took a sure aim, without being seen, waiting tillthey were within about thirty yards of the tree, so that he couldnot miss.

　　While they were thus waiting, and the savages came on, they plainlysaw that one of the three was the runaway savage that had escapedfrom them; and they both knew him distinctly, and resolved that, ifpossible, he should not escape, though they should both fire; sothe other stood ready with his piece, that if he did not drop atthe first shot, he should be sure to have a second.  But the firstwas too good a marksman to miss his aim; for as the savages keptnear one another, a little behind in a line, he fired, and hit twoof them directly; the foremost was killed outright, being shot inthe head; the second, which was the runaway Indian, was shotthrough the body, and fell, but was not quite dead; and the thirdhad a little scratch in the shoulder, perhaps by the same ball thatwent through the body of the second; and being dreadfullyfrightened, though not so much hurt, sat down upon the ground,screaming and yelling in a hideous manner.

　　The five that were behind, more frightened with the noise thansensible of the danger, stood still at first; for the woods madethe sound a thousand times bigger than it really was, the echoesrattling from one side to another, and the fowls rising from allparts, screaming, and every sort making a different noise,according to their kind; just as it was when I fired the first gunthat perhaps was ever shot off in the island.

　　However, all being silent again, and they not knowing what thematter was, came on unconcerned, till they came to the place wheretheir companions lay in a condition miserable enough.  Here thepoor ignorant creatures, not sensible that they were within reachof the same mischief, stood all together over the wounded man,talking, and, as may be supposed, inquiring of him how he came tobe hurt; and who, it is very rational to believe, told them that aflash of fire first, and immediately after that thunder from theirgods, had killed those two and wounded him.  This, I say, isrational; for nothing is more certain than that, as they saw no mannear them, so they had never heard a gun in all their lives, nor somuch as heard of a gun; neither knew they anything of killing andwounding at a distance with fire and bullets:  if they had, onemight reasonably believe they would not have stood so unconcernedto view the fate of their fellows, without some apprehensions oftheir own.

　　Our two men, as they confessed to me, were grieved to be obliged tokill so many poor creatures, who had no notion of their danger;yet, having them all thus in their power, and the first havingloaded his piece again, resolved to let fly both together amongthem; and singling out, by agreement, which to aim at, they shottogether, and killed, or very much wounded, four of them; thefifth, frightened even to death, though not hurt, fell with therest; so that our men, seeing them all fall together, thought theyhad killed them all.

　　The belief that the savages were all killed made our two men comeboldly out from the tree before they had charged their guns, whichwas a wrong step; and they were under some surprise when they cameto the place, and found no less than four of them alive, and ofthem two very little hurt, and one not at all.  This obliged themto fall upon them with the stocks of their muskets; and first theymade sure of the runaway savage, that had been the cause of all themischief, and of another that was hurt in the knee, and put themout of their pain; then the man that was not hurt at all came andkneeled down to them, with his two hands held up, and made piteousmoans to them, by gestures and signs, for his life, but could notsay one word to them that they could understand.  However, theymade signs to him to sit down at the foot of a tree hard by; andone of the Englishmen, with a piece of rope-yarn, which he had bygreat chance in his pocket, tied his two hands behind him, andthere they left him; and with what speed they could made after theother two, which were gone before, fearing they, or any more ofthem, should find way to their covered place in the woods, wheretheir wives, and the few goods they had left, lay.  They came oncein sight of the two men, but it was at a great distance; however,they had the satisfaction to see them cross over a valley towardsthe sea, quite the contrary way from that which led to theirretreat, which they were afraid of; and being satisfied with that,they went back to the tree where they left their prisoner, who, asthey supposed, was delivered by his comrades, for he was gone, andthe two pieces of rope-yarn with which they had bound him lay justat the foot of the tree.

　　They were now in as great concern as before, not knowing whatcourse to take, or how near the enemy might be, or in what number;so they resolved to go away to the place where their wives were, tosee if all was well there, and to make them easy.  These were infright enough, to be sure; for though the savages were their owncountrymen, yet they were most terribly afraid of them, and perhapsthe more for the knowledge they had of them.  When they came there,they found the savages had been in the wood, and very near thatplace, but had not found it; for it was indeed inaccessible, fromthe trees standing so thick, unless the persons seeking it had beendirected by those that knew it, which these did not:  they found,therefore, everything very safe, only the women in a terriblefright.  While they were here they had the comfort to have seven ofthe Spaniards come to their assistance; the other ten, with theirservants, and Friday's father, were gone in a body to defend theirbower, and the corn and cattle that were kept there, in case thesavages should have roved over to that side of the country, butthey did not spread so far.  With the seven Spaniards came one ofthe three savages, who, as I said, were their prisoners formerly;and with them also came the savage whom the Englishmen had leftbound hand and foot at the tree; for it seems they came that way,saw the slaughter of the seven men, and unbound the eighth, andbrought him along with them; where, however, they were obliged tobind again, as they had the two others who were left when the thirdran away.

　　The prisoners now began to be a burden to them; and they were soafraid of their escaping, that they were once resolving to killthem all, believing they were under an absolute necessity to do sofor their own preservation.  However, the chief of the Spaniardswould not consent to it, but ordered, for the present, that theyshould be sent out of the way to my old cave in the valley, and bekept there, with two Spaniards to guard them, and have food fortheir subsistence, which was done; and they were bound there handand foot for that night.

　　When the Spaniards came, the two Englishmen were so encouraged,that they could not satisfy themselves to stay any longer there;but taking five of the Spaniards, and themselves, with four musketsand a pistol among them, and two stout quarter-staves, away theywent in quest of the savages.  And first they came to the treewhere the men lay that had been killed; but it was easy to see thatsome more of the savages had been there, for they had attempted tocarry their dead men away, and had dragged two of them a good way,but had given it over.  From thence they advanced to the firstrising ground, where they had stood and seen their camp destroyed,and where they had the mortification still to see some of thesmoke; but neither could they here see any of the savages.  Theythen resolved, though with all possible caution, to go forwardtowards their ruined plantation; but, a little before they camethither, coming in sight of the sea-shore, they saw plainly thesavages all embarked again in their canoes, in order to be gone.They seemed sorry at first that there was no way to come at them,to give them a parting blow; but, upon the whole, they were verywell satisfied to be rid of them.

　　The poor Englishmen being now twice ruined, and all theirimprovements destroyed, the rest all agreed to come and help themto rebuild, and assist them with needful supplies.  Their threecountrymen, who were not yet noted for having the least inclinationto do any good, yet as soon as they heard of it (for they, livingremote eastward, knew nothing of the matter till all was over),came and offered their help and assistance, and did, very friendly,work for several days to restore their habitation and makenecessaries for them.  And thus in a little time they were set upontheir legs again.

　　About two days after this they had the farther satisfaction ofseeing three of the savages' canoes come driving on shore, and, atsome distance from them, two drowned men, by which they had reasonto believe that they had met with a storm at sea, which had oversetsome of them; for it had blown very hard the night after they wentoff.  However, as some might miscarry, so, on the other hand,enough of them escaped to inform the rest, as well of what they haddone as of what had happened to them; and to whet them on toanother enterprise of the same nature, which they, it seems,resolved to attempt, with sufficient force to carry all beforethem; for except what the first man had told them of inhabitants,they could say little of it of their own knowledge, for they neversaw one man; and the fellow being killed that had affirmed it, theyhad no other witness to confirm it to, them.

　　CHAPTER V - A GREAT VICTORY

　　IT was five or six months after this before they heard any more ofthe savages, in which time our men were in hopes they had eitherforgot their former bad luck, or given over hopes of better; when,on a sudden, they were invaded with a most formidable fleet of noless than eight-and-twenty canoes, full of savages, armed with bowsand arrows, great clubs, wooden swords, and such like engines ofwar; and they brought such numbers with them, that, in short, itput all our people into the utmost consternation.

　　As they came on shore in the evening, and at the easternmost sideof the island, our men had that night to consult and consider whatto do.  In the first place, knowing that their being entirelyconcealed was their only safety before and would be much more sonow, while the number of their enemies would be so great, theyresolved, first of all, to take down the huts which were built forthe two Englishmen, and drive away their goats to the old cave;because they supposed the savages would go directly thither, assoon as it was day, to play the old game over again, though theydid not now land within two leagues of it.  In the next place, theydrove away all the flocks of goats they had at the old bower, as Icalled it, which belonged to the Spaniards; and, in short, left aslittle appearance of inhabitants anywhere as was possible; and thenext morning early they posted themselves, with all their force, atthe plantation of the two men, to wait for their coming.  As theyguessed, so it happened:  these new invaders, leaving their canoesat the east end of the island, came ranging along the shore,directly towards the place, to the number of two hundred and fifty,as near as our men could judge.  Our army was but small indeed;but, that which was worse, they had not arms for all their number.The whole account, it seems, stood thus:  first, as to men,seventeen Spaniards, five Englishmen, old Friday, the three slavestaken with the women, who proved very faithful, and three otherslaves, who lived with the Spaniards.  To arm these, they hadeleven muskets, five pistols, three fowling-pieces, five muskets orfowling-pieces which were taken by me from the mutinous seamen whomI reduced, two swords, and three old halberds.

　　To their slaves they did not give either musket or fusee; but theyhad each a halberd, or a long staff, like a quarter-staff, with agreat spike of iron fastened into each end of it, and by his side ahatchet; also every one of our men had a hatchet.  Two of the womencould not be prevailed upon but they would come into the fight, andthey had bows and arrows, which the Spaniards had taken from thesavages when the first action happened, which I have spoken of,where the Indians fought with one another; and the women hadhatchets too.

　　The chief Spaniard, whom I described so often, commanded the whole;and Will Atkins, who, though a dreadful fellow for wickedness, wasa most daring, bold fellow, commanded under him.  The savages cameforward like lions; and our men, which was the worst of their fate,had no advantage in their situation; only that Will Atkins, who nowproved a most useful fellow, with six men, was planted just behinda small thicket of bushes as an advanced guard, with orders to letthe first of them pass by and then fire into the middle of them,and as soon as he had fired, to make his retreat as nimbly as hecould round a part of the wood, and so come in behind theSpaniards, where they stood, having a thicket of trees before them.

　　When the savages came on, they ran straggling about every way inheaps, out of all manner of order, and Will Atkins let about fiftyof them pass by him; then seeing the rest come in a very thickthrong, he orders three of his men to fire, having loaded theirmuskets with six or seven bullets apiece, about as big as largepistol-bullets.  How many they killed or wounded they knew not, butthe consternation and surprise was inexpressible among the savages;they were frightened to the last degree to hear such a dreadfulnoise, and see their men killed, and others hurt, but see nobodythat did it; when, in the middle of their fright, Will Atkins andhis other three let fly again among the thickest of them; and inless than a minute the first three, being loaded again, gave them athird volley.

　　Had Will Atkins and his men retired immediately, as soon as theyhad fired, as they were ordered to do, or had the rest of the bodybeen at hand to have poured in their shot continually, the savageshad been effectually routed; for the terror that was among themcame principally from this, that they were killed by the gods withthunder and lightning, and could see nobody that hurt them.  ButWill Atkins, staying to load again, discovered the cheat:  some ofthe savages who were at a distance spying them, came upon thembehind; and though Atkins and his men fired at them also, two orthree times, and killed above twenty, retiring as fast as theycould, yet they wounded Atkins himself, and killed one of hisfellow-Englishmen with their arrows, as they did afterwards oneSpaniard, and one of the Indian slaves who came with the women.This slave was a most gallant fellow, and fought most desperately,killing five of them with his own hand, having no weapon but one ofthe armed staves and a hatchet.

　　Our men being thus hard laid at, Atkins wounded, and two other menkilled, retreated to a rising ground in the wood; and theSpaniards, after firing three volleys upon them, retreated also;for their number was so great, and they were so desperate, thatthough above fifty of them were killed, and more than as manywounded, yet they came on in the teeth of our men, fearless ofdanger, and shot their arrows like a cloud; and it was observedthat their wounded men, who were not quite disabled, were madeoutrageous by their wounds, and fought like madmen.

　　When our men retreated, they left the Spaniard and the Englishmanthat were killed behind them:  and the savages, when they came upto them, killed them over again in a wretched manner, breakingtheir arms, legs, and heads, with their clubs and wooden swords,like true savages; but finding our men were gone, they did not seeminclined to pursue them, but drew themselves up in a ring, whichis, it seems, their custom, and shouted twice, in token of theirvictory; after which, they had the mortification to see several oftheir wounded men fall, dying with the mere loss of blood.

　　The Spaniard governor having drawn his little body up together upona rising ground, Atkins, though he was wounded, would have had themmarch and charge again all together at once:  but the Spaniardreplied, "Seignior Atkins, you see how their wounded men fight; letthem alone till morning; all the wounded men will be stiff and sorewith their wounds, and faint with the loss of blood; and so weshall have the fewer to engage."  This advice was good:  but WillAtkins replied merrily, "That is true, seignior, and so shall Itoo; and that is the reason I would go on while I am warm."  "Well,Seignior Atkins," says the Spaniard, "you have behaved gallantly,and done your part; we will fight for you if you cannot come on;but I think it best to stay till morning:" so they waited.

　　But as it was a clear moonlight night, and they found the savagesin great disorder about their dead and wounded men, and a greatnoise and hurry among them where they lay, they afterwards resolvedto fall upon them in the night, especially if they could come togive them but one volley before they were discovered, which theyhad a fair opportunity to do; for one of the Englishmen in whosequarter it was where the fight began, led them round between thewoods and the seaside westward, and then turning short south, theycame so near where the thickest of them lay, that before they wereseen or heard eight of them fired in among them, and did dreadfulexecution upon them; in half a minute more eight others fired afterthem, pouring in their small shot in such a quantity that abundancewere killed and wounded; and all this while they were not able tosee who hurt them, or which way to fly.

　　The Spaniards charged again with the utmost expedition, and thendivided themselves into three bodies, and resolved to fall in amongthem all together.  They had in each body eight persons, that is tosay, twenty-two men and the two women, who, by the way, foughtdesperately.  They divided the firearms equally in each party, aswell as the halberds and staves.  They would have had the womenkept back, but they said they were resolved to die with theirhusbands.  Having thus formed their little army, they marched outfrom among the trees, and came up to the teeth of the enemy,shouting and hallooing as loud as they could; the savages stood alltogether, but were in the utmost confusion, hearing the noise ofour men shouting from three quarters together.  They would havefought if they had seen us; for as soon as we came near enough tobe seen, some arrows were shot, and poor old Friday was wounded,though not dangerously.  But our men gave them no time, but runningup to them, fired among them three ways, and then fell in with thebutt-ends of their muskets, their swords, armed staves, andhatchets, and laid about them so well that, in a word, they set upa dismal screaming and howling, flying to save their lives whichway soever they could.

　　Our men were tired with the execution, and killed or mortallywounded in the two fights about one hundred and eighty of them; therest, being frightened out of their wits, scoured through the woodsand over the hills, with all the speed that fear and nimble feetcould help them to; and as we did not trouble ourselves much topursue them, they got all together to the seaside, where theylanded, and where their canoes lay.  But their disaster was not atan end yet; for it blew a terrible storm of wind that evening fromthe sea, so that it was impossible for them to go off; nay, thestorm continuing all night, when the tide came up their canoes weremost of them driven by the surge of the sea so high upon the shorethat it required infinite toil to get them off; and some of themwere even dashed to pieces against the beach.  Our men, though gladof their victory, yet got little rest that night; but havingrefreshed themselves as well as they could, they resolved to marchto that part of the island where the savages were fled, and seewhat posture they were in.  This necessarily led them over theplace where the fight had been, and where they found several of thepoor creatures not quite dead, and yet past recovering life; asight disagreeable enough to generous minds, for a truly great manthough obliged by the law of battle to destroy his enemy, takes nodelight in his misery.  However, there was no need to give anyorders in this case; for their own savages, who were theirservants, despatched these poor creatures with their hatchets.

　　At length they came in view of the place where the more miserableremains of the savages' army lay, where there appeared about ahundred still; their posture was generally sitting upon the ground,with their knees up towards their mouth, and the head put betweenthe two hands, leaning down upon the knees.  When our men camewithin two musket-shots of them, the Spaniard governor ordered twomuskets to be fired without ball, to alarm them; this he did, thatby their countenance he might know what to expect, whether theywere still in heart to fight, or were so heartily beaten as to bediscouraged, and so he might manage accordingly.  This stratagemtook:  for as soon as the savages heard the first gun, and saw theflash of the second, they started up upon their feet in thegreatest consternation imaginable; and as our men advanced swiftlytowards them, they all ran screaming and yelling away, with a kindof howling noise, which our men did not understand, and had neverheard before; and thus they ran up the hills into the country.

　　At first our men had much rather the weather had been calm, andthey had all gone away to sea:  but they did not then consider thatthis might probably have been the occasion of their coming again insuch multitudes as not to be resisted, or, at least, to come somany and so often as would quite desolate the island, and starvethem.  Will Atkins, therefore, who notwithstanding his wound keptalways with them, proved the best counsellor in this case:  hisadvice was, to take the advantage that offered, and step in betweenthem and their boats, and so deprive them of the capacity of everreturning any more to plague the island.  They consulted long aboutthis; and some were against it for fear of making the wretches flyto the woods and live there desperate, and so they should have themto hunt like wild beasts, be afraid to stir out about theirbusiness, and have their plantations continually rifled, all theirtame goats destroyed, and, in short, be reduced to a life ofcontinual distress.

　　Will Atkins told them they had better have to do with a hundred menthan with a hundred nations; that, as they must destroy theirboats, so they must destroy the men, or be all of them destroyedthemselves.  In a word, he showed them the necessity of it soplainly that they all came into it; so they went to workimmediately with the boats, and getting some dry wood together froma dead tree, they tried to set some of them on fire, but they wereso wet that they would not burn; however, the fire so burned theupper part that it soon made them unfit for use at sea.

　　When the Indians saw what they were about, some of them camerunning out of the woods, and coming as near as they could to ourmen, kneeled down and cried, "Oa, Oa, Waramokoa," and some otherwords of their language, which none of the others understoodanything of; but as they made pitiful gestures and strange noises,it was easy to understand they begged to have their boats spared,and that they would be gone, and never come there again.  But ourmen were now satisfied that they had no way to preserve themselves,or to save their colony, but effectually to prevent any of thesepeople from ever going home again; depending upon this, that ifeven so much as one of them got back into their country to tell thestory, the colony was undone; so that, letting them know that theyshould not have any mercy, they fell to work with their canoes, anddestroyed every one that the storm had not destroyed before; at thesight of which, the savages raised a hideous cry in the woods,which our people heard plain enough, after which they ran about theisland like distracted men, so that, in a word, our men did notreally know what at first to do with them.  Nor did the Spaniards,with all their prudence, consider that while they made those peoplethus desperate, they ought to have kept a good guard at the sametime upon their plantations; for though it is true they had drivenaway their cattle, and the Indians did not find out their mainretreat, I mean my old castle at the hill, nor the cave in thevalley, yet they found out my plantation at the bower, and pulledit all to pieces, and all the fences and planting about it; trodall the corn under foot, tore up the vines and grapes, being justthen almost ripe, and did our men inestimable damage, though tothemselves not one farthing's worth of service.

　　Though our men were able to fight them upon all occasions, yet theywere in no condition to pursue them, or hunt them up and down; foras they were too nimble of foot for our people when they found themsingle, so our men durst not go abroad single, for fear of beingsurrounded with their numbers.  The best was they had no weapons;for though they had bows, they had no arrows left, nor anymaterials to make any; nor had they any edge-tool among them.  Theextremity and distress they were reduced to was great, and indeeddeplorable; but, at the same time, our men were also brought tovery bad circumstances by them, for though their retreats werepreserved, yet their provision was destroyed, and their harvestspoiled, and what to do, or which way to turn themselves, they knewnot.  The only refuge they had now was the stock of cattle they hadin the valley by the cave, and some little corn which grew there,and the plantation of the three Englishmen.  Will Atkins and hiscomrades were now reduced to two; one of them being killed by anarrow, which struck him on the side of his head, just under thetemple, so that he never spoke more; and it was very remarkablethat this was the same barbarous fellow that cut the poor savageslave with his hatchet, and who afterwards intended to havemurdered the Spaniards.

　　I looked upon their case to have been worse at this time than minewas at any time, after I first discovered the grains of barley andrice, and got into the manner of planting and raising my corn, andmy tame cattle; for now they had, as I may say, a hundred wolvesupon the island, which would devour everything they could come at,yet could be hardly come at themselves.

　　When they saw what their circumstances were, the first thing theyconcluded was, that they would, if possible, drive the savages upto the farther part of the island, south-west, that if any morecame on shore they might not find one another; then, that theywould daily hunt and harass them, and kill as many of them as theycould come at, till they had reduced their number; and if theycould at last tame them, and bring them to anything, they wouldgive them corn, and teach them how to plant, and live upon theirdaily labour.  In order to do this, they so followed them, and soterrified them with their guns, that in a few days, if any of themfired a gun at an Indian, if he did not hit him, yet he would falldown for fear.  So dreadfully frightened were they that they keptout of sight farther and farther; till at last our men followedthem, and almost every day killing or wounding some of them, theykept up in the woods or hollow places so much, that it reduced themto the utmost misery for want of food; and many were afterwardsfound dead in the woods, without any hurt, absolutely starved todeath.

　　When our men found this, it made their hearts relent, and pitymoved them, especially the generous-minded Spaniard governor; andhe proposed, if possible, to take one of them alive and bring himto understand what they meant, so far as to be able to act asinterpreter, and go among them and see if they might be brought tosome conditions that might be depended upon, to save their livesand do us no harm.

　　It was some while before any of them could be taken; but being weakand half-starved, one of them was at last surprised and made aprisoner.  He was sullen at first, and would neither eat nor drink;but finding himself kindly used, and victuals given to him, and noviolence offered him, he at last grew tractable, and came tohimself.  They often brought old Friday to talk to him, who alwaystold him how kind the others would be to them all; that they wouldnot only save their lives, but give them part of the island to livein, provided they would give satisfaction that they would keep intheir own bounds, and not come beyond it to injure or prejudiceothers; and that they should have corn given them to plant and makeit grow for their bread, and some bread given them for theirpresent subsistence; and old Friday bade the fellow go and talkwith the rest of his countrymen, and see what they said to it;assuring them that, if they did not agree immediately, they shouldbe all destroyed.

　　The poor wretches, thoroughly humbled, and reduced in number toabout thirty-seven, closed with the proposal at the first offer,and begged to have some food given them; upon which twelveSpaniards and two Englishmen, well armed, with three Indian slavesand old Friday, marched to the place where they were.  The threeIndian slaves carried them a large quantity of bread, some riceboiled up to cakes and dried in the sun, and three live goats; andthey were ordered to go to the side of a hill, where they sat down,ate their provisions very thankfully, and were the most faithfulfellows to their words that could be thought of; for, except whenthey came to beg victuals and directions, they never came out oftheir bounds; and there they lived when I came to the island and Iwent to see them.  They had taught them both to plant corn, makebread, breed tame goats, and milk them:  they wanted nothing butwives in order for them soon to become a nation.  They wereconfined to a neck of land, surrounded with high rocks behind them,and lying plain towards the sea before them, on the south-eastcorner of the island.  They had land enough, and it was very goodand fruitful; about a mile and a half broad, and three or fourmiles in length.  Our men taught them to make wooden spades, suchas I made for myself, and gave among them twelve hatchets and threeor four knives; and there they lived, the most subjected, innocentcreatures that ever were heard of.

　　After this the colony enjoyed a perfect tranquillity with respectto the savages, till I came to revisit them, which was about twoyears after; not but that, now and then, some canoes of savagescame on shore for their triumphal, unnatural feasts; but as theywere of several nations, and perhaps had never heard of those thatcame before, or the reason of it, they did not make any search orinquiry after their countrymen; and if they had, it would have beenvery hard to have found them out.

　　Thus, I think, I have given a full account of all that happened tothem till my return, at least that was worth notice.  The Indianswere wonderfully civilised by them, and they frequently went amongthem; but they forbid, on pain of death, any one of the Indianscoming to them, because they would not have their settlementbetrayed again.  One thing was very remarkable, viz. that theytaught the savages to make wicker-work, or baskets, but they soonoutdid their masters:  for they made abundance of ingenious thingsin wicker-work, particularly baskets, sieves, bird-cages,cupboards, &c.; as also chairs, stools, beds, couches, being veryingenious at such work when they were once put in the way of it.

　　My coming was a particular relief to these people, because wefurnished them with knives, scissors, spades, shovels, pick-axes,and all things of that kind which they could want.  With the helpof those tools they were so very handy that they came at last tobuild up their huts or houses very handsomely, raddling or workingit up like basket-work all the way round.  This piece of ingenuity,although it looked very odd, was an exceeding good fence, as wellagainst heat as against all sorts of vermin; and our men were sotaken with it that they got the Indians to come and do the like forthem; so that when I came to see the two Englishmen's colonies,they looked at a distance as if they all lived like bees in a hive.

　　As for Will Atkins, who was now become a very industrious, useful,and sober fellow, he had made himself such a tent of basket-work asI believe was never seen; it was one hundred and twenty paces roundon the outside, as I measured by my steps; the walls were as closeworked as a basket, in panels or squares of thirty-two in number,and very strong, standing about seven feet high; in the middle wasanother not above twenty-two paces round, but built stronger, beingoctagon in its form, and in the eight corners stood eight verystrong posts; round the top of which he laid strong pieces, knittogether with wooden pins, from which he raised a pyramid for ahandsome roof of eight rafters, joined together very well, thoughhe had no nails, and only a few iron spikes, which he made himself,too, out of the old iron that I had left there.  Indeed, thisfellow showed abundance of ingenuity in several things which he hadno knowledge of:  he made him a forge, with a pair of woodenbellows to blow the fire; he made himself charcoal for his work;and he formed out of the iron crows a middling good anvil to hammerupon:  in this manner he made many things, but especially hooks,staples, and spikes, bolts and hinges.  But to return to the house:after he had pitched the roof of his innermost tent, he worked itup between the rafters with basket-work, so firm, and thatched thatover again so ingeniously with rice-straw, and over that a largeleaf of a tree, which covered the top, that his house was as dry asif it had been tiled or slated.  He owned, indeed, that the savageshad made the basket-work for him.  The outer circuit was covered asa lean-to all round this inner apartment, and long rafters lay fromthe thirty-two angles to the top posts of the inner house, beingabout twenty feet distant, so that there was a space like a walkwithin the outer wicker-wall, and without the inner, near twentyfeet wide.

　　The inner place he partitioned off with the same wickerwork, butmuch fairer, and divided into six apartments, so that he had sixrooms on a floor, and out of every one of these there was a door:first into the entry, or coming into the main tent, another doorinto the main tent, and another door into the space or walk thatwas round it; so that walk was also divided into six equal parts,which served not only for a retreat, but to store up anynecessaries which the family had occasion for.  These six spacesnot taking up the whole circumference, what other apartments theouter circle had were thus ordered:  As soon as you were in at thedoor of the outer circle you had a short passage straight beforeyou to the door of the inner house; but on either side was a wickerpartition and a door in it, by which you went first into a largeroom or storehouse, twenty feet wide and about thirty feet long,and through that into another not quite so long; so that in theouter circle were ten handsome rooms, six of which were only to become at through the apartments of the inner tent, and served asclosets or retiring rooms to the respective chambers of the innercircle; and four large warehouses, or barns, or what you please tocall them, which went through one another, two on either hand ofthe passage, that led through the outer door to the inner tent.Such a piece of basket-work, I believe, was never seen in theworld, nor a house or tent so neatly contrived, much less so built.In this great bee-hive lived the three families, that is to say,Will Atkins and his companion; the third was killed, but his wiferemained with three children, and the other two were not at allbackward to give the widow her full share of everything, I mean asto their corn, milk, grapes, &c., and when they killed a kid, orfound a turtle on the shore; so that they all lived well enough;though it was true they were not so industrious as the other two,as has been observed already.

　　One thing, however, cannot be omitted, viz. that as for religion, Ido not know that there was anything of that kind among them; theyoften, indeed, put one another in mind that there was a God, by thevery common method of seamen, swearing by His name:  nor were theirpoor ignorant savage wives much better for having been married toChristians, as we must call them; for as they knew very little ofGod themselves, so they were utterly incapable of entering into anydiscourse with their wives about a God, or to talk anything to themconcerning religion.

　　The utmost of all the improvement which I can say the wives hadmade from them was, that they had taught them to speak Englishpretty well; and most of their children, who were near twenty inall, were taught to speak English too, from their first learning tospeak, though they at first spoke it in a very broken manner, liketheir mothers.  None of these children were above six years oldwhen I came thither, for it was not much above seven years sincethey had fetched these five savage ladies over; they had allchildren, more or less:  the mothers were all a good sort of well-governed, quiet, laborious women, modest and decent, helpful to oneanother, mighty observant, and subject to their masters (I cannotcall them husbands), and lacked nothing but to be well instructedin the Christian religion, and to be legally married; both of whichwere happily brought about afterwards by my means, or at least inconsequence of my coming among them.

　　CHAPTER VI - THE FRENCH CLERGYMAN'S COUNSEL

　　HAVING thus given an account of the colony in general, and prettymuch of my runagate Englishmen, I must say something of theSpaniards, who were the main body of the family, and in whose storythere are some incidents also remarkable enough.

　　I had a great many discourses with them about their circumstanceswhen they were among the savages.  They told me readily that theyhad no instances to give of their application or ingenuity in thatcountry; that they were a poor, miserable, dejected handful ofpeople; that even if means had been put into their hands, yet theyhad so abandoned themselves to despair, and were so sunk under theweight of their misfortune, that they thought of nothing butstarving.  One of them, a grave and sensible man, told me he wasconvinced they were in the wrong; that it was not the part of wisemen to give themselves up to their misery, but always to take holdof the helps which reason offered, as well for present support asfor future deliverance:  he told me that grief was the mostsenseless, insignificant passion in the world, for that it regardedonly things past, which were generally impossible to be recalled orto be remedied, but had no views of things to come, and had noshare in anything that looked like deliverance, but rather added tothe affliction than proposed a remedy; and upon this he repeated aSpanish proverb, which, though I cannot repeat in the same wordsthat he spoke it in, yet I remember I made it into an Englishproverb of my own, thus:-

　　"In trouble to be troubled,Is to have your trouble doubled."

　　He then ran on in remarks upon all the little improvements I hadmade in my solitude:  my unwearied application, as he called it;and how I had made a condition, which in its circumstances was atfirst much worse than theirs, a thousand times more happy thantheirs was, even now when they were all together.  He told me itwas remarkable that Englishmen had a greater presence of mind intheir distress than any people that ever he met with; that theirunhappy nation and the Portuguese were the worst men in the worldto struggle with misfortunes; for that their first step in dangers,after the common efforts were over, was to despair, lie down underit, and die, without rousing their thoughts up to proper remediesfor escape.

　　I told him their case and mine differed exceedingly; that they werecast upon the shore without necessaries, without supply of food, orpresent sustenance till they could provide for it; that, it wastrue, I had this further disadvantage and discomfort, that I wasalone; but then the supplies I had providentially thrown into myhands, by the unexpected driving of the ship on the shore, was sucha help as would have encouraged any creature in the world to haveapplied himself as I had done.  "Seignior," says the Spaniard, "hadwe poor Spaniards been in your case, we should never have got halfthose things out of the ship, as you did:  nay," says he, "weshould never have found means to have got a raft to carry them, orto have got the raft on shore without boat or sail:  and how muchless should we have done if any of us had been alone!"  Well, Idesired him to abate his compliments, and go on with the history oftheir coming on shore, where they landed.  He told me theyunhappily landed at a place where there were people withoutprovisions; whereas, had they had the common sense to put off tosea again, and gone to another island a little further, they hadfound provisions, though without people:  there being an islandthat way, as they had been told, where there were provisions,though no people - that is to say, that the Spaniards of Trinidadhad frequently been there, and had filled the island with goats andhogs at several times, where they had bred in such multitudes, andwhere turtle and sea-fowls were in such plenty, that they couldhave been in no want of flesh, though they had found no bread;whereas, here they were only sustained with a few roots and herbs,which they understood not, and which had no substance in them, andwhich the inhabitants gave them sparingly enough; and they couldtreat them no better, unless they would turn cannibals and eatmen's flesh.

　　They gave me an account how many ways they strove to civilise thesavages they were with, and to teach them rational customs in theordinary way of living, but in vain; and how they retorted uponthem as unjust that they who came there for assistance and supportshould attempt to set up for instructors to those that gave themfood; intimating, it seems, that none should set up for theinstructors of others but those who could live without them.  Theygave me dismal accounts of the extremities they were driven to; howsometimes they were many days without any food at all, the islandthey were upon being inhabited by a sort of savages that lived moreindolent, and for that reason were less supplied with thenecessaries of life, than they had reason to believe others were inthe same part of the world; and yet they found that these savageswere less ravenous and voracious than those who had better suppliesof food.  Also, they added, they could not but see with whatdemonstrations of wisdom and goodness the governing providence ofGod directs the events of things in this world, which, they said,appeared in their circumstances:  for if, pressed by the hardshipsthey were under, and the barrenness of the country where they were,they had searched after a better to live in, they had then been outof the way of the relief that happened to them by my means.

　　They then gave me an account how the savages whom they livedamongst expected them to go out with them into their wars; and, itwas true, that as they had firearms with them, had they not had thedisaster to lose their ammunition, they could have been serviceablenot only to their friends, but have made themselves terrible bothto friends and enemies; but being without powder and shot, and yetin a condition that they could not in reason decline to go out withtheir landlords to their wars; so when they came into the field ofbattle they were in a worse condition than the savages themselves,for they had neither bows nor arrows, nor could they use those thesavages gave them.  So they could do nothing but stand still and bewounded with arrows, till they came up to the teeth of the enemy;and then, indeed, the three halberds they had were of use to them;and they would often drive a whole little army before them withthose halberds, and sharpened sticks put into the muzzles of theirmuskets.  But for all this they were sometimes surrounded withmultitudes, and in great danger from their arrows, till at lastthey found the way to make themselves large targets of wood, whichthey covered with skins of wild beasts, whose names they knew not,and these covered them from the arrows of the savages:  that,notwithstanding these, they were sometimes in great danger; andfive of them were once knocked down together with the clubs of thesavages, which was the time when one of them was taken prisoner -that is to say, the Spaniard whom I relieved.  At first theythought he had been killed; but when they afterwards heard he wastaken prisoner, they were under the greatest grief imaginable, andwould willingly have all ventured their lives to have rescued him.

　　They told me that when they were so knocked down, the rest of theircompany rescued them, and stood over them fighting till they werecome to themselves, all but him whom they thought had been dead;and then they made their way with their halberds and pieces,standing close together in a line, through a body of above athousand savages, beating down all that came in their way, got thevictory over their enemies, but to their great sorrow, because itwas with the loss of their friend, whom the other party findingalive, carried off with some others, as I gave an account before.They described, most affectionately, how they were surprised withjoy at the return of their friend and companion in misery, who theythought had been devoured by wild beasts of the worst kind - wildmen; and yet, how more and more they were surprised with theaccount he gave them of his errand, and that there was a Christianin any place near, much more one that was able, and had humanityenough, to contribute to their deliverance.

　　They described how they were astonished at the sight of the reliefI sent them, and at the appearance of loaves of bread - things theyhad not seen since their coming to that miserable place; how oftenthey crossed it and blessed it as bread sent from heaven; and whata reviving cordial it was to their spirits to taste it, as also theother things I had sent for their supply; and, after all, theywould have told me something of the joy they were in at the sightof a boat and pilots, to carry them away to the person and placefrom whence all these new comforts came.  But it was impossible toexpress it by words, for their excessive joy naturally driving themto unbecoming extravagances, they had no way to describe them butby telling me they bordered upon lunacy, having no way to give ventto their passions suitable to the sense that was upon them; that insome it worked one way and in some another; and that some of them,through a surprise of joy, would burst into tears, others be starkmad, and others immediately faint.  This discourse extremelyaffected me, and called to my mind Friday's ecstasy when he met hisfather, and the poor people's ecstasy when I took them up at seaafter their ship was on fire; the joy of the mate of the ship whenhe found himself delivered in the place where he expected toperish; and my own joy, when, after twenty-eight years' captivity,I found a good ship ready to carry me to my own country.  All thesethings made me more sensible of the relation of these poor men, andmore affected with it.

　　Having thus given a view of the state of things as I found them, Imust relate the heads of what I did for these people, and thecondition in which I left them.  It was their opinion, and minetoo, that they would be troubled no more with the savages, or ifthey were, they would be able to cut them off, if they were twiceas many as before; so they had no concern about that.  Then Ientered into a serious discourse with the Spaniard, whom I callgovernor, about their stay in the island; for as I was not come tocarry any of them off, so it would not be just to carry off someand leave others, who, perhaps, would be unwilling to stay if theirstrength was diminished.  On the other hand, I told them I came toestablish them there, not to remove them; and then I let them knowthat I had brought with me relief of sundry kinds for them; that Ihad been at a great charge to supply them with all thingsnecessary, as well for their convenience as their defence; and thatI had such and such particular persons with me, as well to increaseand recruit their number, as by the particular necessaryemployments which they were bred to, being artificers, to assistthem in those things in which at present they were in want.

　　They were all together when I talked thus to them; and before Idelivered to them the stores I had brought, I asked them, one byone, if they had entirely forgot and buried the first animositiesthat had been among them, and would shake hands with one another,and engage in a strict friendship and union of interest, that sothere might be no more misunderstandings and jealousies.

　　Will Atkins, with abundance of frankness and good humour, said theyhad met with affliction enough to make them all sober, and enemiesenough to make them all friends; that, for his part, he would liveand die with them, and was so far from designing anything againstthe Spaniards, that he owned they had done nothing to him but whathis own mad humour made necessary, and what he would have done, andperhaps worse, in their case; and that he would ask them pardon, ifI desired it, for the foolish and brutish things he had done tothem, and was very willing and desirous of living in terms ofentire friendship and union with them, and would do anything thatlay in his power to convince them of it; and as for going toEngland, he cared not if he did not go thither these twenty years.

　　The Spaniards said they had, indeed, at first disarmed and excludedWill Atkins and his two countrymen for their ill conduct, as theyhad let me know, and they appealed to me for the necessity theywere under to do so; but that Will Atkins had behaved himself sobravely in the great fight they had with the savages, and onseveral occasions since, and had showed himself so faithful to, andconcerned for, the general interest of them all, that they hadforgotten all that was past, and thought he merited as much to betrusted with arms and supplied with necessaries as any of them;that they had testified their satisfaction in him by committing thecommand to him next to the governor himself; and as they had entireconfidence in him and all his countrymen, so they acknowledged theyhad merited that confidence by all the methods that honest mencould merit to be valued and trusted; and they most heartilyembraced the occasion of giving me this assurance, that they wouldnever have any interest separate from one another.

　　Upon these frank and open declarations of friendship, we appointedthe next day to dine all together; and, indeed, we made a splendidfeast.  I caused the ship's cook and his mate to come on shore anddress our dinner, and the old cook's mate we had on shore assisted.We brought on shore six pieces of good beef and four pieces ofpork, out of the ship's provisions, with our punch-bowl andmaterials to fill it; and in particular I gave them ten bottles ofFrench claret, and ten bottles of English beer; things that neitherthe Spaniards nor the English had tasted for many years, and whichit may be supposed they were very glad of.  The Spaniards added toour feast five whole kids, which the cooks roasted; and three ofthem were sent, covered up close, on board the ship to the seamen,that they might feast on fresh meat from on shore, as we did withtheir salt meat from on board.

　　After this feast, at which we were very innocently merry, I broughtmy cargo of goods; wherein, that there might be no dispute aboutdividing, I showed them that there was a sufficiency for them all,desiring that they might all take an equal quantity, when made up,of the goods that were for wearing.  As, first, I distributed linensufficient to make every one of them four shirts, and, at theSpaniard's request, afterwards made them up six; these wereexceeding comfortable to them, having been what they had long sinceforgot the use of, or what it was to wear them.  I allotted thethin English stuffs, which I mentioned before, to make every one alight coat, like a frock, which I judged fittest for the heat ofthe season, cool and loose; and ordered that whenever they decayed,they should make more, as they thought fit; the like for pumps,shoes, stockings, hats, &c.  I cannot express what pleasure satupon the countenances of all these poor men when they saw the careI had taken of them, and how well I had furnished them.  They toldme I was a father to them; and that having such a correspondent asI was in so remote a part of the world, it would make them forgetthat they were left in a desolate place; and they all voluntarilyengaged to me not to leave the place without my consent.

　　Then I presented to them the people I had brought with me,particularly the tailor, the smith, and the two carpenters, all ofthem most necessary people; but, above all, my general artificer,than whom they could not name anything that was more useful tothem; and the tailor, to show his concern for them, went to workimmediately, and, with my leave, made them every one a shirt, thefirst thing he did; and, what was still more, he taught the womennot only how to sew and stitch, and use the needle, but made themassist to make the shirts for their husbands, and for all the rest.As to the carpenters, I scarce need mention how useful they were;for they took to pieces all my clumsy, unhandy things, and madeclever convenient tables, stools, bedsteads, cupboards, lockers,shelves, and everything they wanted of that kind.  But to let themsee how nature made artificers at first, I carried the carpentersto see Will Atkins' basket-house, as I called it; and they bothowned they never saw an instance of such natural ingenuity before,nor anything so regular and so handily built, at least of its kind;and one of them, when he saw it, after musing a good while, turningabout to me, "I am sure," says he, "that man has no need of us; youneed do nothing but give him tools."

　　Then I brought them out all my store of tools, and gave every man adigging-spade, a shovel, and a rake, for we had no barrows orploughs; and to every separate place a pickaxe, a crow, a broadaxe, and a saw; always appointing, that as often as any were brokenor worn out, they should be supplied without grudging out of thegeneral stores that I left behind.  Nails, staples, hinges,hammers, chisels, knives, scissors, and all sorts of ironwork, theyhad without reserve, as they required; for no man would take morethan he wanted, and he must be a fool that would waste or spoilthem on any account whatever; and for the use of the smith I lefttwo tons of unwrought iron for a supply.

　　My magazine of powder and arms which I brought them was such, evento profusion, that they could not but rejoice at them; for now theycould march as I used to do, with a musket upon each shoulder, ifthere was occasion; and were able to fight a thousand savages, ifthey had but some little advantages of situation, which also theycould not miss, if they had occasion.

　　I carried on shore with me the young man whose mother was starvedto death, and the maid also; she was a sober, well-educated,religious young woman, and behaved so inoffensively that every onegave her a good word; she had, indeed, an unhappy life with us,there being no woman in the ship but herself, but she bore it withpatience.  After a while, seeing things so well ordered, and in sofine a way of thriving upon my island, and considering that theyhad neither business nor acquaintance in the East Indies, or reasonfor taking so long a voyage, both of them came to me and desired Iwould give them leave to remain on the island, and be entered amongmy family, as they called it.  I agreed to this readily; and theyhad a little plot of ground allotted to them, where they had threetents or houses set up, surrounded with a basket-work, palisadoedlike Atkins's, adjoining to his plantation.  Their tents werecontrived so that they had each of them a room apart to lodge in,and a middle tent like a great storehouse to lay their goods in,and to eat and to drink in.  And now the other two Englishmenremoved their habitation to the same place; and so the island wasdivided into three colonies, and no more - viz. the Spaniards, withold Friday and the first servants, at my habitation under the hill,which was, in a word, the capital city, and where they had soenlarged and extended their works, as well under as on the outsideof the hill, that they lived, though perfectly concealed, yet fullat large.  Never was there such a little city in a wood, and sohid, in any part of the world; for I verify believe that a thousandmen might have ranged the island a month, and, if they had notknown there was such a thing, and looked on purpose for it, theywould not have found it.  Indeed the trees stood so thick and soclose, and grew so fast woven one into another, that nothing butcutting them down first could discover the place, except the onlytwo narrow entrances where they went in and out could be found,which was not very easy; one of them was close down at the water'sedge, on the side of the creek, and it was afterwards above twohundred yards to the place; and the other was up a ladder at twice,as I have already described it; and they had also a large wood,thickly planted, on the top of the hill, containing above an acre,which grew apace, and concealed the place from all discovery there,with only one narrow place between two trees, not easily to bediscovered, to enter on that side.

　　The other colony was that of Will Atkins, where there were fourfamilies of Englishmen, I mean those I had left there, with theirwives and children; three savages that were slaves, the widow andchildren of the Englishman that was killed, the young man and themaid, and, by the way, we made a wife of her before we went away.There were besides the two carpenters and the tailor, whom Ibrought with me for them:  also the smith, who was a very necessaryman to them, especially as a gunsmith, to take care of their arms;and my other man, whom I called Jack-of-all-trades, who was inhimself as good almost as twenty men; for he was not only a veryingenious fellow, but a very merry fellow, and before I went awaywe married him to the honest maid that came with the youth in theship I mentioned before.

　　And now I speak of marrying, it brings me naturally to saysomething of the French ecclesiastic that I had brought with me outof the ship's crew whom I took up at sea.  It is true this man wasa Roman, and perhaps it may give offence to some hereafter if Ileave anything extraordinary upon record of a man whom, before Ibegin, I must (to set him out in just colours) represent in termsvery much to his disadvantage, in the account of Protestants; as,first, that he was a Papist; secondly, a Popish priest; andthirdly, a French Popish priest.  But justice demands of me to givehim a due character; and I must say, he was a grave, sober, pious,and most religious person; exact in his life, extensive in hischarity, and exemplary in almost everything he did.  What then canany one say against being very sensible of the value of such a man,notwithstanding his profession? though it may be my opinionperhaps, as well as the opinion of others who shall read this, thathe was mistaken.

　　The first hour that I began to converse with him after he hadagreed to go with me to the East Indies, I found reason to delightexceedingly in his conversation; and he first began with me aboutreligion in the most obliging manner imaginable.  "Sir," says he,"you have not only under God" (and at that he crossed his breast)"saved my life, but you have admitted me to go this voyage in yourship, and by your obliging civility have taken me into your family,giving me an opportunity of free conversation.  Now, sir, you seeby my habit what my profession is, and I guess by your nation whatyours is; I may think it is my duty, and doubtless it is so, to usemy utmost endeavours, on all occasions, to bring all the souls Ican to the knowledge of the truth, and to embrace the Catholicdoctrine; but as I am here under your permission, and in yourfamily, I am bound, in justice to your kindness as well as indecency and good manners, to be under your government; andtherefore I shall not, without your leave, enter into any debate onthe points of religion in which we may not agree, further than youshall give me leave."

　　I told him his carriage was so modest that I could not butacknowledge it; that it was true we were such people as they callheretics, but that he was not the first Catholic I had conversedwith without falling into inconveniences, or carrying the questionsto any height in debate; that he should not find himself the worseused for being of a different opinion from us, and if we did notconverse without any dislike on either side, it should be hisfault, not ours.

　　He replied that he thought all our conversation might be easilyseparated from disputes; that it was not his business to capprinciples with every man he conversed with; and that he ratherdesired me to converse with him as a gentleman than as areligionist; and that, if I would give him leave at any time todiscourse upon religious subjects, he would readily comply with it,and that he did not doubt but I would allow him also to defend hisown opinions as well as he could; but that without my leave hewould not break in upon me with any such thing.  He told mefurther, that he would not cease to do all that became him, in hisoffice as a priest, as well as a private Christian, to procure thegood of the ship, and the safety of all that was in her; andthough, perhaps, we would not join with him, and he could not praywith us, he hoped he might pray for us, which he would do upon alloccasions.  In this manner we conversed; and as he was of the mostobliging, gentlemanlike behaviour, so he was, if I may be allowedto say so, a man of good sense, and, as I believe, of greatlearning.

　　He gave me a most diverting account of his life, and of the manyextraordinary events of it; of many adventures which had befallenhim in the few years that he had been abroad in the world; andparticularly, it was very remarkable, that in the voyage he was nowengaged in he had had the misfortune to be five times shipped andunshipped, and never to go to the place whither any of the ships hewas in were at first designed.  That his first intent was to havegone to Martinico, and that he went on board a ship bound thitherat St. Malo; but being forced into Lisbon by bad weather, the shipreceived some damage by running aground in the mouth of the riverTagus, and was obliged to unload her cargo there; but finding aPortuguese ship there bound for the Madeiras, and ready to sail,and supposing he should meet with a ship there bound to Martinico,he went on board, in order to sail to the Madeiras; but the masterof the Portuguese ship being but an indifferent mariner, had beenout of his reckoning, and they drove to Fayal; where, however, hehappened to find a very good market for his cargo, which was corn,and therefore resolved not to go to the Madeiras, but to load saltat the Isle of May, and to go away to Newfoundland.  He had noremedy in this exigence but to go with the ship, and had a prettygood voyage as far as the Banks (so they call the place where theycatch the fish), where, meeting with a French ship bound fromFrance to Quebec, and from thence to Martinico, to carryprovisions, he thought he should have an opportunity to completehis first design, but when he came to Quebec, the master of theship died, and the vessel proceeded no further; so the next voyagehe shipped himself for France, in the ship that was burned when wetook them up at sea, and then shipped with us for the East Indies,as I have already said.  Thus he had been disappointed in fivevoyages; all, as I may call it, in one voyage, besides what I shallhave occasion to mention further of him.

　　But I shall not make digression into other men's stories which haveno relation to my own; so I return to what concerns our affair inthe island.  He came to me one morning (for he lodged among us allthe while we were upon the island), and it happened to be just whenI was going to visit the Englishmen's colony, at the furthest partof the island; I say, he came to me, and told me, with a very gravecountenance, that he had for two or three days desired anopportunity of some discourse with me, which he hoped would not bedispleasing to me, because he thought it might in some measurecorrespond with my general design, which was the prosperity of mynew colony, and perhaps might put it, at least more than he yetthought it was, in the way of God's blessing.

　　I looked a little surprised at the last of his discourse, andturning a little short, "How, sir," said I, "can it be said that weare not in the way of God's blessing, after such visibleassistances and deliverances as we have seen here, and of which Ihave given you a large account?"  "If you had pleased, sir," saidhe, with a world of modesty, and yet great readiness, "to haveheard me, you would have found no room to have been displeased,much less to think so hard of me, that I should suggest that youhave not had wonderful assistances and deliverances; and I hope, onyour behalf, that you are in the way of God's blessing, and yourdesign is exceeding good, and will prosper.  But, sir, though itwere more so than is even possible to you, yet there may be someamong you that are not equally right in their actions:  and youknow that in the story of the children of Israel, one Achan in thecamp removed God's blessing from them, and turned His hand soagainst them, that six-and-thirty of them, though not concerned inthe crime, were the objects of divine vengeance, and bore theweight of that punishment."

　　I was sensibly touched with this discourse, and told him hisinference was so just, and the whole design seemed so sincere, andwas really so religious in its own nature, that I was very sorry Ihad interrupted him, and begged him to go on; and, in the meantime,because it seemed that what we had both to say might take up sometime, I told him I was going to the Englishmen's plantations, andasked him to go with me, and we might discourse of it by the way.He told me he would the more willingly wait on me thither, becausethere partly the thing was acted which he desired to speak to meabout; so we walked on, and I pressed him to be free and plain withme in what he had to say.

　　"Why, then, sir," said he, "be pleased to give me leave to lay downa few propositions, as the foundation of what I have to say, thatwe may not differ in the general principles, though we may be ofsome differing opinions in the practice of particulars.  First,sir, though we differ in some of the doctrinal articles of religion(and it is very unhappy it is so, especially in the case before us,as I shall show afterwards), yet there are some general principlesin which we both agree - that there is a God; and that this Godhaving given us some stated general rules for our service andobedience, we ought not willingly and knowingly to offend Him,either by neglecting to do what He has commanded, or by doing whatHe has expressly forbidden.  And let our different religions bewhat they will, this general principle is readily owned by us all,that the blessing of God does not ordinarily follow presumptuoussinning against His command; and every good Christian will beaffectionately concerned to prevent any that are under his careliving in a total neglect of God and His commands.  It is not yourmen being Protestants, whatever my opinion may be of such, thatdischarges me from being concerned for their souls, and fromendeavouring, if it lies before me, that they should live in aslittle distance from enmity with their Maker as possible,especially if you give me leave to meddle so far in your circuit."

　　I could not yet imagine what he aimed at, and told him I grantedall he had said, and thanked him that he would so far concernhimself for us:  and begged he would explain the particulars ofwhat he had observed, that like Joshua, to take his own parable, Imight put away the accursed thing from us.

　　"Why, then, sir," says he, "I will take the liberty you give me;and there are three things, which, if I am right, must stand in theway of God's blessing upon your endeavours here, and which I shouldrejoice, for your sake and their own, to see removed.  And, sir, Ipromise myself that you will fully agree with me in them all, assoon as I name them; especially because I shall convince you, thatevery one of them may, with great ease, and very much to yoursatisfaction, be remedied.  First, sir," says he, "you have herefour Englishmen, who have fetched women from among the savages, andhave taken them as their wives, and have had many children by themall, and yet are not married to them after any stated legal manner,as the laws of God and man require.  To this, sir, I know, you willobject that there was no clergyman or priest of any kind to performthe ceremony; nor any pen and ink, or paper, to write down acontract of marriage, and have it signed between them.  And I knowalso, sir, what the Spaniard governor has told you, I mean of theagreement that he obliged them to make when they took those women,viz. that they should choose them out by consent, and keepseparately to them; which, by the way, is nothing of a marriage, noagreement with the women as wives, but only an agreement amongthemselves, to keep them from quarrelling.  But, sir, the essenceof the sacrament of matrimony" (so he called it, being a Roman)"consists not only in the mutual consent of the parties to take oneanother as man and wife, but in the formal and legal obligationthat there is in the contract to compel the man and woman, at alltimes, to own and acknowledge each other; obliging the man toabstain from all other women, to engage in no other contract whilethese subsist; and, on all occasions, as ability allows, to providehonestly for them and their children; and to oblige the women tothe same or like conditions, on their side.  Now, sir," says he,"these men may, when they please, or when occasion presents,abandon these women, disown their children, leave them to perish,and take other women, and marry them while these are living;" andhere he added, with some warmth, "How, sir, is God honoured in thisunlawful liberty?  And how shall a blessing succeed your endeavoursin this place, however good in themselves, and however sincere inyour design, while these men, who at present are your subjects,under your absolute government and dominion, are allowed by you tolive in open adultery?"

　　I confess I was struck with the thing itself, but much more withthe convincing arguments he supported it with; but I thought tohave got off my young priest by telling him that all that part wasdone when I was not there:  and that they had lived so many yearswith them now, that if it was adultery, it was past remedy; nothingcould be done in it now.

　　"Sir," says he, "asking your pardon for such freedom, you are rightin this, that, it being done in your absence, you could not becharged with that part of the crime; but, I beseech you, flatternot yourself that you are not, therefore, under an obligation to doyour utmost now to put an end to it.  You should legally andeffectually marry them; and as, sir, my way of marrying may not beeasy to reconcile them to, though it will be effectual, even byyour own laws, so your way may be as well before God, and as validamong men.  I mean by a written contract signed by both man andwoman, and by all the witnesses present, which all the laws ofEurope would decree to be valid."

　　I was amazed to see so much true piety, and so much sincerity ofzeal, besides the unusual impartiality in his discourse as to hisown party or church, and such true warmth for preserving peoplethat he had no knowledge of or relation to from transgressing thelaws of God.  But recollecting what he had said of marrying them bya written contract, which I knew he would stand to, I returned itback upon him, and told him I granted all that he had said to bejust, and on his part very kind; that I would discourse with themen upon the point now, when I came to them; and I knew no reasonwhy they should scruple to let him marry them all, which I knewwell enough would be granted to be as authentic and valid inEngland as if they were married by one of our own clergymen.

　　I then pressed him to tell me what was the second complaint whichhe had to make, acknowledging that I was very much his debtor forthe first, and thanking him heartily for it.  He told me he woulduse the same freedom and plainness in the second, and hoped I wouldtake it as well; and this was, that notwithstanding these Englishsubjects of mine, as he called them, had lived with these womenalmost seven years, had taught them to speak English, and even toread it, and that they were, as he perceived, women of tolerableunderstanding, and capable of instruction, yet they had not, tothis hour, taught them anything of the Christian religion - no, notso much as to know there was a God, or a worship, or in what mannerGod was to be served, or that their own idolatry, and worshippingthey knew not whom, was false and absurd.  This he said was anunaccountable neglect, and what God would certainly call them toaccount for, and perhaps at last take the work out of their hands.He spoke this very affectionately and warmly.

　　"I am persuaded," says he, "had those men lived in the savagecountry whence their wives came, the savages would have taken morepains to have brought them to be idolaters, and to worship thedevil, than any of these men, so far as I can see, have taken withthem to teach the knowledge of the true God.  Now, sir," said he,"though I do not acknowledge your religion, or you mine, yet wewould be glad to see the devil's servants and the subjects of hiskingdom taught to know religion; and that they might, at least,hear of God and a Redeemer, and the resurrection, and of a futurestate - things which we all believe; that they might, at least, beso much nearer coming into the bosom of the true Church than theyare now in the public profession of idolatry and devil-worship."

　　I could hold no longer:  I took him in my arms and embraced himeagerly.  "How far," said I to him, "have I been from understandingthe most essential part of a Christian, viz. to love the interestof the Christian Church, and the good of other men's souls!  Iscarce have known what belongs to the being a Christian." - "Oh,sir! do not say so," replied he; "this thing is not your fault." -"No," said I; "but why did I never lay it to heart as well as you?"- "It is not too late yet," said he; "be not too forward to condemnyourself." - "But what can be done now?" said I:  "you see I amgoing away." - "Will you give me leave to talk with these poor menabout it?" - "Yes, with all my heart," said I:  "and oblige them togive heed to what you say too." - "As to that," said he, "we mustleave them to the mercy of Christ; but it is your business toassist them, encourage them, and instruct them; and if you give meleave, and God His blessing, I do not doubt but the poor ignorantsouls shall be brought home to the great circle of Christianity, ifnot into the particular faith we all embrace, and that even whileyou stay here."  Upon this I said, "I shall not only give youleave, but give you a thousand thanks for it."

　　I now pressed him for the third article in which we were to blame."Why, really," says he, "it is of the same nature.  It is aboutyour poor savages, who are, as I may say, your conquered subjects.It is a maxim, sir, that is or ought to be received among allChristians, of what church or pretended church soever, that theChristian knowledge ought to be propagated by all possible meansand on all possible occasions.  It is on this principle that ourChurch sends missionaries into Persia, India, and China; and thatour clergy, even of the superior sort, willingly engage in the mosthazardous voyages, and the most dangerous residence amongstmurderers and barbarians, to teach them the knowledge of the trueGod, and to bring them over to embrace the Christian faith.  Now,sir, you have such an opportunity here to have six or seven andthirty poor savages brought over from a state of idolatry to theknowledge of God, their Maker and Redeemer, that I wonder how youcan pass such an occasion of doing good, which is really worth theexpense of a man's whole life."

　　I was now struck dumb indeed, and had not one word to say.  I hadhere the spirit of true Christian zeal for God and religion beforeme.  As for me, I had not so much as entertained a thought of thisin my heart before, and I believe I should not have thought of it;for I looked upon these savages as slaves, and people whom, had wenot had any work for them to do, we would have used as such, orwould have been glad to have transported them to any part of theworld; for our business was to get rid of them, and we would allhave been satisfied if they had been sent to any country, so theyhad never seen their own.  I was confounded at his discourse, andknew not what answer to make him.

　　He looked earnestly at me, seeing my confusion.  "Sir," says he, "Ishall be very sorry if what I have said gives you any offence." -"No, no," said I,  "I am offended with nobody but myself; but I amperfectly confounded, not only to think that I should never takeany notice of this before, but with reflecting what notice I amable to take of it now.  You know, sir," said I, "whatcircumstances I am in; I am bound to the East Indies in a shipfreighted by merchants, and to whom it would be an insufferablepiece of injustice to detain their ship here, the men lying allthis while at victuals and wages on the owners' account.  It istrue, I agreed to be allowed twelve days here, and if I stay more,I must pay three pounds sterling PER DIEM demurrage; nor can I stayupon demurrage above eight days more, and I have been here thirteenalready; so that I am perfectly unable to engage in this workunless I would suffer myself to be left behind here again; in whichcase, if this single ship should miscarry in any part of hervoyage, I should be just in the same condition that I was left inhere at first, and from which I have been so wonderfullydelivered."  He owned the case was very hard upon me as to myvoyage; but laid it home upon my conscience whether the blessing ofsaving thirty-seven souls was not worth venturing all I had in theworld for.  I was not so sensible of that as he was.  I replied tohim thus:  "Why, sir, it is a valuable thing, indeed, to be aninstrument in God's hand to convert thirty-seven heathens to theknowledge of Christ:  but as you are an ecclesiastic, and are givenover to the work, so it seems so naturally to fall in the way ofyour profession; how is it, then, that you do not rather offeryourself to undertake it than to press me to do it?"

　　Upon this he faced about just before me, as he walked along, andputting me to a full stop, made me a very low bow.  "I mostheartily thank God and you, sir," said he, "for giving me soevident a call to so blessed a work; and if you think yourselfdischarged from it, and desire me to undertake it, I will mostreadily do it, and think it a happy reward for all the hazards anddifficulties of such a broken, disappointed voyage as I have metwith, that I am dropped at last into so glorious a work."

　　I discovered a kind of rapture in his face while he spoke this tome; his eyes sparkled like fire; his face glowed, and his colourcame and went; in a word, he was fired with the joy of beingembarked in such a work.  I paused a considerable while before Icould tell what to say to him; for I was really surprised to find aman of such sincerity, and who seemed possessed of a zeal beyondthe ordinary rate of men.  But after I had considered it a while, Iasked him seriously if he was in earnest, and that he wouldventure, on the single consideration of an attempt to convert thosepoor people, to be locked up in an unplanted island for perhaps hislife, and at last might not know whether he should be able to dothem good or not?  He turned short upon me, and asked me what Icalled a venture?  "Pray, sir," said he, "what do you think Iconsented to go in your ship to the East Indies for?" - "ay," saidI, "that I know not, unless it was to preach to the Indians." -"Doubtless it was," said he; "and do you think, if I can convertthese thirty-seven men to the faith of Jesus Christ, it is notworth my time, though I should never be fetched off the islandagain? - nay, is it not infinitely of more worth to save so manysouls than my life is, or the life of twenty more of the sameprofession?  Yes, sir," says he, "I would give God thanks all mydays if I could be made the happy instrument of saving the souls ofthose poor men, though I were never to get my foot off this islandor see my native country any more.  But since you will honour mewith putting me into this work, for which I will pray for you allthe days of my life, I have one humble petition to you besides." -"What is that?" said I. - "Why," says he, "it is, that you willleave your man Friday with me, to be my interpreter to them, and toassist me; for without some help I cannot speak to them, or they tome."

　　I was sensibly touched at his requesting Friday, because I couldnot think of parting with him, and that for many reasons:  he hadbeen the companion of my travels; he was not only faithful to me,but sincerely affectionate to the last degree; and I had resolvedto do something considerable for him if he out-lived me, as it wasprobable he would.  Then I knew that, as I had bred Friday up to bea Protestant, it would quite confound him to bring him to embraceanother religion; and he would never, while his eyes were open,believe that his old master was a heretic, and would be damned; andthis might in the end ruin the poor fellow's principles, and soturn him back again to his first idolatry.  However, a suddenthought relieved me in this strait, and it was this:  I told him Icould not say that I was willing to part with Friday on any accountwhatever, though a work that to him was of more value than his lifeought to be of much more value than the keeping or parting with aservant.  On the other hand, I was persuaded that Friday would byno means agree to part with me; and I could not force him to itwithout his consent, without manifest injustice; because I hadpromised I would never send him away, and he had promised andengaged that he would never leave me, unless I sent him away.

　　He seemed very much concerned at it, for he had no rational accessto these poor people, seeing he did not understand one word oftheir language, nor they one of his.  To remove this difficulty, Itold him Friday's father had learned Spanish, which I found he alsounderstood, and he should serve him as an interpreter.  So he wasmuch better satisfied, and nothing could persuade him but he wouldstay and endeavour to convert them; but Providence gave anothervery happy turn to all this.

　　I come back now to the first part of his objections.  When we cameto the Englishmen, I sent for them all together, and after someaccount given them of what I had done for them, viz. what necessarythings I had provided for them, and how they were distributed,which they were very sensible of, and very thankful for, I began totalk to them of the scandalous life they led, and gave them a fullaccount of the notice the clergyman had taken of it; and arguinghow unchristian and irreligious a life it was, I first asked themif they were married men or bachelors?  They soon explained theircondition to me, and showed that two of them were widowers, and theother three were single men, or bachelors.  I asked them with whatconscience they could take these women, and call them their wives,and have so many children by them, and not be lawfully married tothem?  They all gave me the answer I expected, viz. that there wasnobody to marry them; that they agreed before the governor to keepthem as their wives, and to maintain them and own them as theirwives; and they thought, as things stood with them, they were aslegally married as if they had been married by a parson and withall the formalities in the world.

　　I told them that no doubt they were married in the sight of God,and were bound in conscience to keep them as their wives; but thatthe laws of men being otherwise, they might desert the poor womenand children hereafter; and that their wives, being poor desolatewomen, friendless and moneyless, would have no way to helpthemselves.  I therefore told them that unless I was assured oftheir honest intent, I could do nothing for them, but would takecare that what I did should be for the women and children withoutthem; and that, unless they would give me some assurances that theywould marry the women, I could not think it was convenient theyshould continue together as man and wife; for that it was bothscandalous to men and offensive to God, who they could not thinkwould bless them if they went on thus.

　　All this went on as I expected; and they told me, especially WillAtkins, who now seemed to speak for the rest, that they loved theirwives as well as if they had been born in their own native country,and would not leave them on any account whatever; and they didverily believe that their wives were as virtuous and as modest, anddid, to the utmost of their skill, as much for them and for theirchildren, as any woman could possibly do:  and they would not partwith them on any account.  Will Atkins, for his own particular,added that if any man would take him away, and offer to carry himhome to England, and make him captain of the best man-of-war in thenavy, he would not go with him if he might not carry his wife andchildren with him; and if there was a clergyman in the ship, hewould be married to her now with all his heart.

　　This was just as I would have it.  The priest was not with me atthat moment, but he was not far off; so to try him further, I toldhim I had a clergyman with me, and, if he was sincere, I would havehim married next morning, and bade him consider of it, and talkwith the rest.  He said, as for himself, he need not consider of itat all, for he was very ready to do it, and was glad I had aminister with me, and he believed they would be all willing also.I then told him that my friend, the minister, was a Frenchman, andcould not speak English, but I would act the clerk between them.He never so much as asked me whether he was a Papist or Protestant,which was, indeed, what I was afraid of.  We then parted, and Iwent back to my clergyman, and Will Atkins went in to talk with hiscompanions.  I desired the French gentleman not to say anything tothem till the business was thoroughly ripe; and I told him whatanswer the men had given me.

　　Before I went from their quarter they all came to me and told methey had been considering what I had said; that they were glad tohear I had a clergyman in my company, and they were very willing togive me the satisfaction I desired, and to be formally married assoon as I pleased; for they were far from desiring to part withtheir wives, and that they meant nothing but what was very honestwhen they chose them.  So I appointed them to meet me the nextmorning; and, in the meantime, they should let their wives know themeaning of the marriage law; and that it was not only to preventany scandal, but also to oblige them that they should not forsakethem, whatever might happen.

　　The women were easily made sensible of the meaning of the thing,and were very well satisfied with it, as, indeed, they had reasonto be:  so they failed not to attend all together at my apartmentnext morning, where I brought out my clergyman; and though he hadnot on a minister's gown, after the manner of England, or the habitof a priest, after the manner of France, yet having a black vestsomething like a cassock, with a sash round it, he did not lookvery unlike a minister; and as for his language, I was hisinterpreter.  But the seriousness of his behaviour to them, and thescruples he made of marrying the women, because they were notbaptized and professed Christians, gave them an exceeding reverencefor his person; and there was no need, after that, to inquirewhether he was a clergyman or not.  Indeed, I was afraid hisscruples would have been carried so far as that he would not havemarried them at all; nay, notwithstanding all I was able to say tohim, he resisted me, though modestly, yet very steadily, and atlast refused absolutely to marry them, unless he had first talkedwith the men and the women too; and though at first I was a littlebackward to it, yet at last I agreed to it with a good will,perceiving the sincerity of his design.

　　When he came to them he let them know that I had acquainted himwith their circumstances, and with the present design; that he wasvery willing to perform that part of his function, and marry them,as I had desired; but that before he could do it, he must take theliberty to talk with them.  He told them that in the sight of allindifferent men, and in the sense of the laws of society, they hadlived all this while in a state of sin; and that it was true thatnothing but the consenting to marry, or effectually separating themfrom one another, could now put an end to it; but there was adifficulty in it, too, with respect to the laws of Christianmatrimony, which he was not fully satisfied about, that of marryingone that is a professed Christian to a savage, an idolater, and aheathen - one that is not baptized; and yet that he did not seethat there was time left to endeavour to persuade the women to bebaptized, or to profess the name of Christ, whom they had, hedoubted, heard nothing of, and without which they could not bebaptized.  He told them he doubted they were but indifferentChristians themselves; that they had but little knowledge of God orof His ways, and, therefore, he could not expect that they had saidmuch to their wives on that head yet; but that unless they wouldpromise him to use their endeavours with their wives to persuadethem to become Christians, and would, as well as they could,instruct them in the knowledge and belief of God that made them,and to worship Jesus Christ that redeemed them, he could not marrythem; for he would have no hand in joining Christians with savages,nor was it consistent with the principles of the Christianreligion, and was, indeed, expressly forbidden in God's law.

　　They heard all this very attentively, and I delivered it veryfaithfully to them from his mouth, as near his own words as Icould; only sometimes adding something of my own, to convince themhow just it was, and that I was of his mind; and I always verycarefully distinguished between what I said from myself and whatwere the clergyman's words.  They told me it was very true what thegentleman said, that they were very indifferent Christiansthemselves, and that they had never talked to their wives aboutreligion.  "Lord, sir," says Will Atkins, "how should we teach themreligion?  Why, we know nothing ourselves; and besides, sir," saidhe, "should we talk to them of God and Jesus Christ, and heaven andhell, it would make them laugh at us, and ask us what we believeourselves.  And if we should tell them that we believe all thethings we speak of to them, such as of good people going to heaven,and wicked people to the devil, they would ask us where we intendto go ourselves, that believe all this, and are such wicked fellowsas we indeed are?  Why, sir; 'tis enough to give them a surfeit ofreligion at first hearing; folks must have some religion themselvesbefore they begin to teach other people." - "Will Atkins," said Ito him, "though I am afraid that what you say has too much truth init, yet can you not tell your wife she is in the wrong; that thereis a God and a religion better than her own; that her gods areidols; that they can neither hear nor speak; that there is a greatBeing that made all things, and that can destroy all that He hasmade; that He rewards the good and punishes the bad; and that weare to be judged by Him at last for all we do here?  You are not soignorant but even nature itself will teach you that all this istrue; and I am satisfied you know it all to be true, and believe ityourself." - "That is true, sir," said Atkins; "but with what facecan I say anything to my wife of all this, when she will tell meimmediately it cannot be true?" - "Not true!" said I; "what do youmean by that?" - "Why, sir," said he, "she will tell me it cannotbe true that this God I shall tell her of can be just, or canpunish or reward, since I am not punished and sent to the devil,that have been such a wicked creature as she knows I have been,even to her, and to everybody else; and that I should be sufferedto live, that have been always acting so contrary to what I musttell her is good, and to what I ought to have done." - "Why, truly,Atkins," said I, "I am afraid thou speakest too much truth;" andwith that I informed the clergyman of what Atkins had said, for hewas impatient to know.  "Oh," said the priest, "tell him there isone thing will make him the best minister in the world to his wife,and that is repentance; for none teach repentance like truepenitents.  He wants nothing but to repent, and then he will be somuch the better qualified to instruct his wife; he will then beable to tell her that there is not only a God, and that He is thejust rewarder of good and evil, but that He is a merciful Being,and with infinite goodness and long-suffering forbears to punishthose that offend; waiting to be gracious, and willing not thedeath of a sinner, but rather that he should return and live; andeven reserves damnation to the general day of retribution; that itis a clear evidence of God and of a future state that righteous menreceive not their reward, or wicked men their punishment, till theycome into another world; and this will lead him to teach his wifethe doctrine of the resurrection and of the last judgment.  Let himbut repent himself, he will be an excellent preacher of repentanceto his wife."

　　I repeated all this to Atkins, who looked very serious all thewhile, and, as we could easily perceive, was more than ordinarilyaffected with it; when being eager, and hardly suffering me to makean end, "I know all this, master," says he, "and a great deal more;but I have not the impudence to talk thus to my wife, when God andmy conscience know, and my wife will be an undeniable evidenceagainst me, that I have lived as if I had never heard of a God orfuture state, or anything about it; and to talk of my repenting,alas!" (and with that he fetched a deep sigh, and I could see thatthe tears stood in his eyes) "'tis past all that with me." - "Pastit, Atkins?" said I:  "what dost thou mean by that?" - "I know wellenough what I mean," says he; "I mean 'tis too late, and that istoo true."

　　I told the clergyman, word for word, what he said, and thisaffectionate man could not refrain from tears; but, recoveringhimself, said to me, "Ask him but one question.  Is he easy that itis too late; or is he troubled, and wishes it were not so?"  I putthe question fairly to Atkins; and he answered with a great deal ofpassion, "How could any man be easy in a condition that mustcertainly end in eternal destruction? that he was far from beingeasy; but that, on the contrary, he believed it would one time orother ruin him." - "What do you mean by that?" said I. - "Why," hesaid, "he believed he should one time or other cut his throat, toput an end to the terror of it."

　　The clergyman shook his head, with great concern in his face, whenI told him all this; but turning quick to me upon it, says, "Ifthat be his case, we may assure him it is not too late; Christ willgive him repentance.  But pray," says he, "explain this to him:that as no man is saved but by Christ, and the merit of His passionprocuring divine mercy for him, how can it be too late for any manto receive mercy?  Does he think he is able to sin beyond the poweror reach of divine mercy?  Pray tell him there may be a time whenprovoked mercy will no longer strive, and when God may refuse tohear, but that it is never too late for men to ask mercy; and we,that are Christ's servants, are commanded to preach mercy at alltimes, in the name of Jesus Christ, to all those that sincerelyrepent:  so that it is never too late to repent."

　　I told Atkins all this, and he heard me with great earnestness; butit seemed as if he turned off the discourse to the rest, for hesaid to me he would go and have some talk with his wife; so he wentout a while, and we talked to the rest.  I perceived they were allstupidly ignorant as to matters of religion, as much as I was whenI went rambling away from my father; yet there were none of thembackward to hear what had been said; and all of them seriouslypromised that they would talk with their wives about it, and dotheir endeavours to persuade them to turn Christians.

　　The clergyman smiled upon me when I reported what answer they gave,but said nothing a good while; but at last, shaking his head, "Wethat are Christ's servants," says he, "can go no further than toexhort and instruct:  and when men comply, submit to the reproof,and promise what we ask, 'tis all we can do; we are bound to accepttheir good words; but believe me, sir," said he, "whatever you mayhave known of the life of that man you call Will Atkin's, I believehe is the only sincere convert among them:  I will not despair ofthe rest; but that man is apparently struck with the sense of hispast life, and I doubt not, when he comes to talk of religion tohis wife, he will talk himself effectually into it:  for attemptingto teach others is sometimes the best way of teaching ourselves.If that poor Atkins begins but once to talk seriously of JesusChrist to his wife, he will assuredly talk himself into a thoroughconvert, make himself a penitent, and who knows what may follow."

　　Upon this discourse, however, and their promising, as above, toendeavour to persuade their wives to embrace Christianity, hemarried the two other couple; but Will Atkins and his wife were notyet come in.  After this, my clergyman, waiting a while, wascurious to know where Atkins was gone, and turning to me, said, "Ientreat you, sir, let us walk out of your labyrinth here and look;I daresay we shall find this poor man somewhere or other talkingseriously to his wife, and teaching her already something ofreligion."  I began to be of the same mind; so we went outtogether, and I carried him a way which none knew but myself, andwhere the trees were so very thick that it was not easy to seethrough the thicket of leaves, and far harder to see in than to seeout:  when, coming to the edge of the wood, I saw Atkins and histawny wife sitting under the shade of a bush, very eager indiscourse:  I stopped short till my clergyman came up to me, andthen having showed him where they were, we stood and looked verysteadily at them a good while.  We observed him very earnest withher, pointing up to the sun, and to every quarter of the heavens,and then down to the earth, then out to the sea, then to himself,then to her, to the woods, to the trees.  "Now," says theclergyman, "you see my words are made good, the man preaches toher; mark him now, he is telling her that our God has made him,her, and the heavens, the earth, the sea, the woods, the trees,&c." - "I believe he is," said I.  Immediately we perceived WillAtkins start upon his feet, fall down on his knees, and lift upboth his hands.  We supposed he said something, but we could nothear him; it was too far for that.  He did not continue kneelinghalf a minute, but comes and sits down again by his wife, and talksto her again; we perceived then the woman very attentive, butwhether she said anything to him we could not tell.  While the poorfellow was upon his knees I could see the tears run plentifullydown my clergyman's cheeks, and I could hardly forbear myself; butit was a great affliction to us both that we were not near enoughto hear anything that passed between them.  Well, however, we couldcome no nearer for fear of disturbing them:  so we resolved to seean end of this piece of still conversation, and it spoke loudenough to us without the help of voice.  He sat down again, as Ihave said, close by her, and talked again earnestly to her, and twoor three times we could see him embrace her most passionately;another time we saw him take out his handkerchief and wipe hereyes, and then kiss her again with a kind of transport veryunusual; and after several of these things, we saw him on a suddenjump up again, and lend her his hand to help her up, whenimmediately leading her by the hand a step or two, they bothkneeled down together, and continued so about two minutes.

　　My friend could bear it no longer, but cries out aloud, "St. Paul!St. Paul! behold he prayeth."  I was afraid Atkins would hear him,therefore I entreated him to withhold himself a while, that wemight see an end of the scene, which to me, I must confess, was themost affecting that ever I saw in my life.  Well, he strove withhimself for a while, but was in such raptures to think that thepoor heathen woman was become a Christian, that he was not able tocontain himself; he wept several times, then throwing up his handsand crossing his breast, said over several things ejaculatory, andby the way of giving God thanks for so miraculous a testimony ofthe success of our endeavours.  Some he spoke softly, and I couldnot well hear others; some things he said in Latin, some in French;then two or three times the tears would interrupt him, that hecould not speak at all; but I begged that he would contain himself,and let us more narrowly and fully observe what was before us,which he did for a time, the scene not being near ended yet; forafter the poor man and his wife were risen again from their knees,we observed he stood talking still eagerly to her, and we observedher motion, that she was greatly affected with what he said, by herfrequently lifting up her hands, laying her hand to her breast, andsuch other postures as express the greatest seriousness andattention; this continued about half a quarter of an hour, and thenthey walked away, so we could see no more of them in thatsituation.

　　I took this interval to say to the clergyman, first, that I wasglad to see the particulars we had both been witnesses to; that,though I was hard enough of belief in such cases, yet that I beganto think it was all very sincere here, both in the man and hiswife, however ignorant they might both be, and I hoped such abeginning would yet have a more happy end.  "But, my friend," addedI, "will you give me leave to start one difficulty here?  I cannottell how to object the least thing against that affectionateconcern which you show for the turning of the poor people fromtheir paganism to the Christian religion; but how does this comfortyou, while these people are, in your account, out of the pale ofthe Catholic Church, without which you believe there is nosalvation? so that you esteem these but heretics, as effectuallylost as the pagans themselves."

　　To this he answered, with abundance of candour, thus:  "Sir, I am aCatholic of the Roman Church, and a priest of the order of St.Benedict, and I embrace all the principles of the Roman faith; butyet, if you will believe me, and that I do not speak in complimentto you, or in respect to my circumstances and your civilities; Isay nevertheless, I do not look upon you, who call yourselvesreformed, without some charity.  I dare not say (though I know itis our opinion in general) that you cannot be saved; I will by nomeans limit the mercy of Christ so far as think that He cannotreceive you into the bosom of His Church, in a manner to usunperceivable; and I hope you have the same charity for us:  I praydaily for you being all restored to Christ's Church, by whatsoevermethod He, who is all-wise, is pleased to direct.  In the meantime,surely you will allow it consists with me as a Roman to distinguishfar between a Protestant and a pagan; between one that calls onJesus Christ, though in a way which I do not think is according tothe true faith, and a savage or a barbarian, that knows no God, noChrist, no Redeemer; and if you are not within the pale of theCatholic Church, we hope you are nearer being restored to it thanthose who know nothing of God or of His Church:  and I rejoice,therefore, when I see this poor man, who you say has been aprofligate, and almost a murderer kneel down and pray to JesusChrist, as we suppose he did, though not fully enlightened;believing that God, from whom every such work proceeds, willsensibly touch his heart, and bring him to the further knowledge ofthat truth in His own time; and if God shall influence this poorman to convert and instruct the ignorant savage, his wife, I cannever believe that he shall be cast away himself.  And have I notreason, then, to rejoice, the nearer any are brought to theknowledge of Christ, though they may not be brought quite home intothe bosom of the Catholic Church just at the time when I desire it,leaving it to the goodness of Christ to perfect His work in His owntime, and in his own way?  Certainly, I would rejoice if all thesavages in America were brought, like this poor woman, to pray toGod, though they were all to be Protestants at first, rather thanthey should continue pagans or heathens; firmly believing, that Hethat had bestowed the first light on them would farther illuminatethem with a beam of His heavenly grace, and bring them into thepale of His Church when He should see good."

　　CHAPTER VII - CONVERSATION BETWIXT WILL ATKINS AND HIS WIFE

　　I WAS astonished at the sincerity and temper of this pious Papist,as much as I was oppressed by the power of his reasoning; and itpresently occurred to my thoughts, that if such a temper wasuniversal, we might be all Catholic Christians, whatever Church orparticular profession we joined in; that a spirit of charity wouldsoon work us all up into right principles; and as he thought thatthe like charity would make us all Catholics, so I told him Ibelieved, had all the members of his Church the like moderation,they would soon all be Protestants.  And there we left that part;for we never disputed at all.  However, I talked to him anotherway, and taking him by the hand, "My friend," says I, "I wish allthe clergy of the Romish Church were blessed with such moderation,and had an equal share of your charity.  I am entirely of youropinion; but I must tell you that if you should preach suchdoctrine in Spain or Italy, they would put you into theInquisition." - "It may be so," said he; "I know not what theywould do in Spain or Italy; but I will not say they would be thebetter Christians for that severity; for I am sure there is noheresy in abounding with charity."

　　Well, as Will Atkins and his wife were gone, our business there wasover, so we went back our own way; and when we came back, we foundthem waiting to be called in.  Observing this, I asked my clergymanif we should discover to him that we had seen him under the bush ornot; and it was his opinion we should not, but that we should talkto him first, and hear what he would say to us; so we called him inalone, nobody being in the place but ourselves, and I began byasking him some particulars about his parentage and education.  Hetold me frankly enough that his father was a clergyman who wouldhave taught him well, but that he, Will Atkins, despised allinstruction and correction; and by his brutish conduct cut thethread of all his father's comforts and shortened his days, forthat he broke his heart by the most ungrateful, unnatural returnfor the most affectionate treatment a father ever gave.

　　In what he said there seemed so much sincerity of repentance, thatit painfully affected me.  I could not but reflect that I, too, hadshortened the life of a good, tender father by my bad conduct andobstinate self-will.  I was, indeed, so surprised with what he hadtold me, that I thought, instead of my going about to teach andinstruct him, the man was made a teacher and instructor to me in amost unexpected manner.

　　I laid all this before the young clergyman, who was greatlyaffected with it, and said to me, "Did I not say, sir, that whenthis man was converted he would preach to us all?  I tell you, sir,if this one man be made a true penitent, there will be no need ofme; he will make Christians of all in the island." - But having alittle composed myself, I renewed my discourse with Will Atkins."But, Will," said I, "how comes the sense of this matter to touchyou just now?"

　　W.A. - Sir, you have set me about a work that has struck a dartthough my very soul; I have been talking about God and religion tomy wife, in order, as you directed me, to make a Christian of her,and she has preached such a sermon to me as I shall never forgetwhile I live.

　　R.C. - No, no, it is not your wife has preached to you; but whenyou were moving religious arguments to her, conscience has flungthem back upon you.

　　W.A. - Ay, sir, with such force as is not to be resisted.

　　R.C. - Pray, Will, let us know what passed between you and yourwife; for I know something of it already.

　　W.A. - Sir, it is impossible to give you a full account of it; I amtoo full to hold it, and yet have no tongue to express it; but lether have said what she will, though I cannot give you an account ofit, this I can tell you, that I have resolved to amend and reformmy life.

　　R.C. - But tell us some of it:  how did you begin, Will?  For thishas been an extraordinary case, that is certain.  She has preacheda sermon, indeed, if she has wrought this upon you.

　　W.A. - Why, I first told her the nature of our laws about marriage,and what the reasons were that men and women were obliged to enterinto such compacts as it was neither in the power of one nor otherto break; that otherwise, order and justice could not bemaintained, and men would run from their wives, and abandon theirchildren, mix confusedly with one another, and neither families bekept entire, nor inheritances be settled by legal descent.

　　R.C. - You talk like a civilian, Will.  Could you make herunderstand what you meant by inheritance and families?  They knowno such things among the savages, but marry anyhow, without regardto relation, consanguinity, or family; brother and sister, nay, asI have been told, even the father and the daughter, and the son andthe mother.

　　W.A. - I believe, sir, you are misinformed, and my wife assures meof the contrary, and that they abhor it; perhaps, for any furtherrelations, they may not be so exact as we are; but she tells menever in the near relationship you speak of.

　　R.C. - Well, what did she say to what you told her?

　　W.A. - She said she liked it very well, as it was much better thanin her country.

　　R.C. - But did you tell her what marriage was?

　　W.A. - Ay, ay, there began our dialogue.  I asked her if she wouldbe married to me our way.  She asked me what way that was; I toldher marriage was appointed by God; and here we had a strange talktogether, indeed, as ever man and wife had, I believe.

　　N.B. - This dialogue between Will Atkins and his wife, which I tookdown in writing just after he told it me, was as follows:-

　　WIFE. - Appointed by your God! - Why, have you a God in yourcountry?

　　W.A. - Yes, my dear, God is in every country.

　　WIFE. - No your God in my country; my country have the great oldBenamuckee God.

　　W.A. - Child, I am very unfit to show you who God is; God is inheaven and made the heaven and the earth, the sea, and all that inthem is.

　　WIFE. - No makee de earth; no you God makee all earth; no makee mycountry.

　　[Will Atkins laughed a little at her expression of God not makingher country.]

　　WIFE. - No laugh; why laugh me?  This no ting to laugh.

　　[He was justly reproved by his wife, for she was more serious thanhe at first.]

　　W.A. - That's true, indeed; I will not laugh any more, my dear.

　　WIFE. - Why you say you God makee all?

　　W.A. - Yes, child, our God made the whole world, and you, and me,and all things; for He is the only true God, and there is no Godbut Him.  He lives for ever in heaven.

　　WIFE. - Why you no tell me long ago?

　　W.A. - That's true, indeed; but I have been a wicked wretch, andhave not only forgotten to acquaint thee with anything before, buthave lived without God in the world myself.

　　WIFE. - What, have you a great God in your country, you no knowHim?  No say O to Him?  No do good ting for Him?  That no possible.

　　W.A. - It is true; though, for all that, we live as if there was noGod in heaven, or that He had no power on earth.

　　Wife. - But why God let you do so?  Why He no makee you good live?

　　W.A. - It is all our own fault.

　　WIFE. - But you say me He is great, much great, have much greatpower; can makee kill when He will:  why He no makee kill when youno serve Him? no say O to Him? no be good mans?

　　W.A. - That is true, He might strike me dead; and I ought to expectit, for I have been a wicked wretch, that is true; but God ismerciful, and does not deal with us as we deserve.

　　WIFE. - But then do you not tell God thankee for that too?

　　W. A. - No, indeed, I have not thanked God for His mercy, any morethan I have feared God from His power.

　　WIFE. - Then you God no God; me no think, believe He be such one,great much power, strong:  no makee kill you, though you make Himmuch angry.

　　W.A. - What, will my wicked life hinder you from believing in God?What a dreadful creature am I! and what a sad truth is it, that thehorrid lives of Christians hinder the conversion of heathens!

　　WIFE. - How me tink you have great much God up there [she points upto heaven], and yet no do well, no do good ting?  Can He tell?Sure He no tell what you do?

　　W.A. - Yes, yes, He knows and sees all things; He hears us speak,sees what we do, knows what we think though we do not speak.

　　WIFE. - What!  He no hear you curse, swear, speak de great damn?

　　W.A. - Yes, yes, He hears it all.

　　WIFE. - Where be then the much great power strong?

　　W.A. - He is merciful, that is all we can say for it; and thisproves Him to be the true God; He is God, and not man, andtherefore we are not consumed.

　　[Here Will Atkins told us he was struck with horror to think how hecould tell his wife so clearly that God sees, and hears, and knowsthe secret thoughts of the heart, and all that we do, and yet thathe had dared to do all the vile things he had done.]

　　WIFE. - Merciful!  What you call dat?

　　W.A. - He is our Father and Maker, and He pities and spares us.

　　WIFE. - So then He never makee kill, never angry when you dowicked; then He no good Himself, or no great able.

　　W.A. - Yes, yes, my dear, He is infinitely good and infinitelygreat, and able to punish too; and sometimes, to show His justiceand vengeance, He lets fly His anger to destroy sinners and makeexamples; many are cut off in their sins.

　　WIFE. - But no makee kill you yet; then He tell you, maybe, that Heno makee you kill:  so you makee the bargain with Him, you do badthing, He no be angry at you when He be angry at other mans.

　　W.A. - No, indeed, my sins are all presumptions upon His goodness;and He would be infinitely just if He destroyed me, as He has doneother men.

　　WIFE. - Well, and yet no kill, no makee you dead:  what you say toHim for that?  You no tell Him thankee for all that too?

　　W.A. - I am an unthankful, ungrateful dog, that is true.

　　WIFE. - Why He no makee you much good better? you say He makee you.

　　W.A. - He made me as He made all the world:  it is I have deformedmyself and abused His goodness, and made myself an abominablewretch.

　　WIFE. - I wish you makee God know me.  I no makee Him angry - I nodo bad wicked thing.

　　[Here Will Atkins said his heart sunk within him to hear a pooruntaught creature desire to be taught to know God, and he such awicked wretch, that he could not say one word to her about God, butwhat the reproach of his own carriage would make most irrational toher to believe; nay, that already she had told him that she couldnot believe in God, because he, that was so wicked, was notdestroyed.]

　　W.A. - My dear, you mean, you wish I could teach you to know God,not God to know you; for He knows you already, and every thought inyour heart.

　　WIFE. - Why, then, He know what I say to you now:  He know me wishto know Him.  How shall me know who makee me?

　　W.A. - Poor creature, He must teach thee:  I cannot teach thee.  Iwill pray to Him to teach thee to know Him, and forgive me, that amunworthy to teach thee.

　　[The poor fellow was in such an agony at her desiring him to makeher know God, and her wishing to know Him, that he said he felldown on his knees before her, and prayed to God to enlighten hermind with the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, and to pardon hissins, and accept of his being the unworthy instrument ofinstructing her in the principles of religion:  after which he satdown by her again, and their dialogue went on.  This was the timewhen we saw him kneel down and hold up his hands.]

　　Wife. - What you put down the knee for?  What you hold up the handfor?  What you say?  Who you speak to?  What is all that?

　　W.A. - My dear, I bow my knees in token of my submission to Himthat made me:  I said O to Him, as you call it, and as your old mendo to their idol Benamuckee; that is, I prayed to Him.

　　WIFE. - What say you O to Him for?

　　W.A. - I prayed to Him to open your eyes and your understanding,that you may know Him, and be accepted by Him.

　　WIFE. - Can He do that too?

　　W.A. - Yes, He can:  He can do all things.

　　WIFE. - But now He hear what you say?

　　W.A. - Yes, He has bid us pray to Him, and promised to hear us.

　　WIFE. - Bid you pray?  When He bid you?  How He bid you?  What youhear Him speak?

　　W.A. - No, we do not hear Him speak; but He has revealed Himselfmany ways to us.

　　[Here he was at a great loss to make her understand that God hasrevealed Himself to us by His word, and what His word was; but atlast he told it to her thus.]

　　W.A. - God has spoken to some good men in former days, even fromheaven, by plain words; and God has inspired good men by HisSpirit; and they have written all His laws down in a book.

　　WIFE. - Me no understand that; where is book?

　　W.A. - Alas! my poor creature, I have not this book; but I hope Ishall one time or other get it for you, and help you to read it.

　　[Here he embraced her with great affection, but with inexpressiblegrief that he had not a Bible.]

　　WIFE. - But how you makee me know that God teachee them to writethat book?

　　W.A. - By the same rule that we know Him to be God.

　　WIFE. - What rule?  What way you know Him?

　　W.A. - Because He teaches and commands nothing but what is good,righteous, and holy, and tends to make us perfectly good, as wellas perfectly happy; and because He forbids and commands us to avoidall that is wicked, that is evil in itself, or evil in itsconsequence.

　　WIFE. - That me would understand, that me fain see; if He teacheeall good thing, He makee all good thing, He give all thing, He hearme when I say O to Him, as you do just now; He makee me good if Iwish to be good; He spare me, no makee kill me, when I no be good:all this you say He do, yet He be great God; me take, think,believe Him to be great God; me say O to Him with you, my dear.

　　Here the poor man could forbear no longer, but raised her up, madeher kneel by him, and he prayed to God aloud to instruct her in theknowledge of Himself, by His Spirit; and that by some goodprovidence, if possible, she might, some time or other, come tohave a Bible, that she might read the word of God, and be taught byit to know Him.  This was the time that we saw him lift her up bythe hand, and saw him kneel down by her, as above.

　　They had several other discourses, it seems, after this; andparticularly she made him promise that, since he confessed his ownlife had been a wicked, abominable course of provocations againstGod, that he would reform it, and not make God angry any more, lestHe should make him dead, as she called it, and then she would beleft alone, and never be taught to know this God better; and lesthe should be miserable, as he had told her wicked men would beafter death.

　　This was a strange account, and very affecting to us both, butparticularly to the young clergyman; he was, indeed, wonderfullysurprised with it, but under the greatest affliction imaginablethat he could not talk to her, that he could not speak English tomake her understand him; and as she spoke but very broken English,he could not understand her; however, he turned himself to me, andtold me that he believed that there must be more to do with thiswoman than to marry her.  I did not understand him at first; but atlength he explained himself, viz. that she ought to be baptized.  Iagreed with him in that part readily, and wished it to be donepresently.  "No, no; hold, sir," says he; "though I would have herbe baptized, by all means, for I must observe that Will Atkins, herhusband, has indeed brought her, in a wonderful manner, to bewilling to embrace a religious life, and has given her just ideasof the being of a God; of His power, justice, and mercy:  yet Idesire to know of him if he has said anything to her of JesusChrist, and of the salvation of sinners; of the nature of faith inHim, and redemption by Him; of the Holy Spirit, the resurrection,the last judgment, and the future state."

　　I called Will Atkins again, and asked him; but the poor fellow fellimmediately into tears, and told us he had said something to her ofall those things, but that he was himself so wicked a creature, andhis own conscience so reproached him with his horrid, ungodly life,that he trembled at the apprehensions that her knowledge of himshould lessen the attention she should give to those things, andmake her rather contemn religion than receive it; but he wasassured, he said, that her mind was so disposed to receive dueimpressions of all those things, and that if I would but discoursewith her, she would make it appear to my satisfaction that mylabour would not be lost upon her.

　　Accordingly I called her in, and placing myself as interpreterbetween my religious priest and the woman, I entreated him to beginwith her; but sure such a sermon was never preached by a Popishpriest in these latter ages of the world; and as I told him, Ithought he had all the zeal, all the knowledge, all the sincerityof a Christian, without the error of a Roman Catholic; and that Itook him to be such a clergyman as the Roman bishops were beforethe Church of Rome assumed spiritual sovereignty over theconsciences of men.  In a word, he brought the poor woman toembrace the knowledge of Christ, and of redemption by Him, not withwonder and astonishment only, as she did the first notions of aGod, but with joy and faith; with an affection, and a surprisingdegree of understanding, scarce to be imagined, much less to beexpressed; and, at her own request, she was baptized.

　　When he was preparing to baptize her, I entreated him that he wouldperform that office with some caution, that the man might notperceive he was of the Roman Church, if possible, because of otherill consequences which might attend a difference among us in thatvery religion which we were instructing the other in.  He told methat as he had no consecrated chapel, nor proper things for theoffice, I should see he would do it in a manner that I should notknow by it that he was a Roman Catholic myself, if I had not knownit before; and so he did; for saying only some words over tohimself in Latin, which I could not understand, he poured a wholedishful of water upon the woman's head, pronouncing in French, veryloud, "Mary" (which was the name her husband desired me to giveher, for I was her godfather), "I baptize thee in the name of theFather, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;" so that none couldknow anything by it what religion he was of.  He gave thebenediction afterwards in Latin, but either Will Atkins did notknow but it was French, or else did not take notice of it at thattime.

　　As soon as this was over we married them; and after the marriagewas over, he turned to Will Atkins, and in a very affectionatemanner exhorted him, not only to persevere in that good dispositionhe was in, but to support the convictions that were upon him by aresolution to reform his life:  told him it was in vain to say herepented if he did not forsake his crimes; represented to him howGod had honoured him with being the instrument of bringing his wifeto the knowledge of the Christian religion, and that he should becareful he did not dishonour the grace of God; and that if he did,he would see the heathen a better Christian than himself; thesavage converted, and the instrument cast away.  He said a greatmany good things to them both; and then, recommending them to God'sgoodness, gave them the benediction again, I repeating everythingto them in English; and thus ended the ceremony.  I think it wasthe most pleasant and agreeable day to me that ever I passed in mywhole life.  But my clergyman had not done yet:  his thoughts hungcontinually upon the conversion of the thirty-seven savages, andfain be would have stayed upon the island to have undertaken it;but I convinced him, first, that his undertaking was impracticablein itself; and, secondly, that perhaps I would put it into a way ofbeing done in his absence to his satisfaction.

　　Having thus brought the affairs of the island to a narrow compass,I was preparing to go on board the ship, when the young man I hadtaken out of the famished ship's company came to me, and told me heunderstood I had a clergyman with me, and that I had caused theEnglishmen to be married to the savages; that he had a match too,which he desired might be finished before I went, between twoChristians, which he hoped would not be disagreeable to me.

　　I knew this must be the young woman who was his mother's servant,for there was no other Christian woman on the island:  so I beganto persuade him not to do anything of that kind rashly, or becausebe found himself in this solitary circumstance.  I represented tohim that he had some considerable substance in the world, and goodfriends, as I understood by himself, and the maid also; that themaid was not only poor, and a servant, but was unequal to him, shebeing six or seven and twenty years old, and he not above seventeenor eighteen; that he might very probably, with my assistance, makea remove from this wilderness, and come into his own country again;and that then it would be a thousand to one but he would repent hischoice, and the dislike of that circumstance might bedisadvantageous to both.  I was going to say more, but heinterrupted me, smiling, and told me, with a great deal of modesty,that I mistook in my guesses - that he had nothing of that kind inhis thoughts; and he was very glad to hear that I had an intent ofputting them in a way to see their own country again; and nothingshould have made him think of staying there, but that the voyage Iwas going was so exceeding long and hazardous, and would carry himquite out of the reach of all his friends; that he had nothing todesire of me but that I would settle him in some little property inthe island where he was, give him a servant or two, and some fewnecessaries, and he would live here like a planter, waiting thegood time when, if ever I returned to England, I would redeem him.He hoped I would not be unmindful of him when I came to England:that he would give me some letters to his friends in London, to letthem know how good I had been to him, and in what part of the worldand what circumstances I had left him in:  and he promised me thatwhenever I redeemed him, the plantation, and all the improvementshe had made upon it, let the value be what it would, should bewholly mine.

　　His discourse was very prettily delivered, considering his youth,and was the more agreeable to me, because he told me positively thematch was not for himself. I gave him all possible assurances thatif I lived to come safe to England, I would deliver his letters,and do his business effectually; and that he might depend I shouldnever forget the circumstances I had left him in.  But still I wasimpatient to know who was the person to be married; upon which hetold me it was my Jack-of-all-trades and his maid Susan.  I wasmost agreeably surprised when he named the match; for, indeed, Ithought it very suitable.  The character of that man I have givenalready; and as for the maid, she was a very honest, modest, sober,and religious young woman:  had a very good share of sense, wasagreeable enough in her person, spoke very handsomely and to thepurpose, always with decency and good manners, and was neither toobackward to speak when requisite, nor impertinently forward when itwas not her business; very handy and housewifely, and an excellentmanager; fit, indeed, to have been governess to the whole island;and she knew very well how to behave in every respect.

　　The match being proposed in this manner, we married them the sameday; and as I was father at the altar, and gave her away, so I gaveher a portion; for I appointed her and her husband a handsome largespace of ground for their plantation; and indeed this match, andthe proposal the young gentleman made to give him a small propertyin the island, put me upon parcelling it out amongst them, thatthey might not quarrel afterwards about their situation.

　　This sharing out the land to them I left to Will Atkins, who wasnow grown a sober, grave, managing fellow, perfectly reformed,exceedingly pious and religious; and, as far as I may be allowed tospeak positively in such a case, I verily believe he was a truepenitent.  He divided things so justly, and so much to every one'ssatisfaction, that they only desired one general writing under myhand for the whole, which I caused to be drawn up, and signed andsealed, setting out the bounds and situation of every man'splantation, and testifying that I gave them thereby severally aright to the whole possession and inheritance of the respectiveplantations or farms, with their improvements, to them and theirheirs, reserving all the rest of the island as my own property, anda certain rent for every particular plantation after eleven years,if I, or any one from me, or in my name, came to demand it,producing an attested copy of the same writing.  As to thegovernment and laws among them, I told them I was not capable ofgiving them better rules than they were able to give themselves;only I made them promise me to live in love and good neighbourhoodwith one another; and so I prepared to leave them.

　　One thing I must not omit, and that is, that being now settled in akind of commonwealth among themselves, and having much business inhand, it was odd to have seven-and-thirty Indians live in a nook ofthe island, independent, and, indeed, unemployed; for except theproviding themselves food, which they had difficulty enough to dosometimes, they had no manner of business or property to manage.  Iproposed, therefore, to the governor Spaniard that he should go tothem, with Friday's father, and propose to them to remove, andeither plant for themselves, or be taken into their severalfamilies as servants to be maintained for their labour, but withoutbeing absolute slaves; for I would not permit them to make themslaves by force, by any means; because they had their liberty giventhem by capitulation, as it were articles of surrender, which theyought not to break.

　　They most willingly embraced the proposal, and came all verycheerfully along with him:  so we allotted them land andplantations, which three or four accepted of, but all the restchose to be employed as servants in the several families we hadsettled.  Thus my colony was in a manner settled as follows:  TheSpaniards possessed my original habitation, which was the capitalcity, and extended their plantations all along the side of thebrook, which made the creek that I have so often described, as faras my bower; and as they increased their culture, it went alwayseastward.  The English lived in the north-east part, where WillAtkins and his comrades began, and came on southward and south-west, towards the back part of the Spaniards; and every plantationhad a great addition of land to take in, if they found occasion, sothat they need not jostle one another for want of room.  All theeast end of the island was left uninhabited, that if any of thesavages should come on shore there only for their customarybarbarities, they might come and go; if they disturbed nobody,nobody would disturb them:  and no doubt but they were oftenashore, and went away again; for I never heard that the planterswere ever attacked or disturbed any more.

　　CHAPTER VIII - SAILS FROM THE ISLAND FOR THE BRAZILS

　　IT now came into my thoughts that I had hinted to my friend theclergyman that the work of converting the savages might perhaps beset on foot in his absence to his satisfaction, and I told him thatnow I thought that it was put in a fair way; for the savages, beingthus divided among the Christians, if they would but every one ofthem do their part with those which came under their hands, I hopedit might have a very good effect.

　　He agreed presently in that, if they did their part.  "But how,"says he, "shall we obtain that of them?"  I told him we would callthem all together, and leave it in charge with them, or go to them,one by one, which he thought best; so we divided it - he to speakto the Spaniards, who were all Papists, and I to speak to theEnglish, who were all Protestants; and we recommended it earnestlyto them, and made them promise that they would never make anydistinction of Papist or Protestant in their exhorting the savagesto turn Christians, but teach them the general knowledge of thetrue God, and of their Saviour Jesus Christ; and they likewisepromised us that they would never have any differences or disputesone with another about religion.

　　When I came to Will Atkins's house, I found that the young woman Ihave mentioned above, and Will Atkins's wife, were becomeintimates; and this prudent, religious young woman had perfectedthe work Will Atkins had begun; and though it was not above fourdays after what I have related, yet the new-baptized savage womanwas made such a Christian as I have seldom heard of in all myobservation or conversation in the world.  It came next into mymind, in the morning before I went to them, that amongst all theneedful things I had to leave with them I had not left them aBible, in which I showed myself less considering for them than mygood friend the widow was for me when she sent me the cargo of ahundred pounds from Lisbon, where she packed up three Bibles and aPrayer-book.  However, the good woman's charity had a greaterextent than ever she imagined, for they were reserved for thecomfort and instruction of those that made much better use of themthan I had done.

　　I took one of the Bibles in my pocket, and when I came to WillAtkins's tent, or house, and found the young woman and Atkins'sbaptized wife had been discoursing of religion together - for WillAtkins told it me with a great deal of joy - I asked if they weretogether now, and he said, "Yes"; so I went into the house, and hewith me, and we found them together very earnest in discourse."Oh, sir," says Will Atkins, "when God has sinners to reconcile toHimself, and aliens to bring home, He never wants a messenger; mywife has got a new instructor:  I knew I was unworthy, as I wasincapable of that work; that young woman has been sent hither fromheaven - she is enough to convert a whole island of savages."  Theyoung woman blushed, and rose up to go away, but I desired her tosit-still; I told her she had a good work upon her hands, and Ihoped God would bless her in it.

　　We talked a little, and I did not perceive that they had any bookamong them, though I did not ask; but I put my hand into my pocket,and pulled out my Bible.  "Here," said I to Atkins, "I have broughtyou an assistant that perhaps you had not before."  The man was soconfounded that he was not able to speak for some time; but,recovering himself, he takes it with both his hands, and turning tohis wife, "Here, my dear," says he, "did not I tell you our God,though He lives above, could hear what we have said?  Here's thebook I prayed for when you and I kneeled down under the bush; nowGod has heard us and sent it."  When he had said so, the man fellinto such passionate transports, that between the joy of having it,and giving God thanks for it, the tears ran down his face like achild that was crying.

　　The woman was surprised, and was like to have run into a mistakethat none of us were aware of; for she firmly believed God had sentthe book upon her husband's petition.  It is true thatprovidentially it was so, and might be taken so in a consequentsense; but I believe it would have been no difficult matter at thattime to have persuaded the poor woman to have believed that anexpress messenger came from heaven on purpose to bring thatindividual book.  But it was too serious a matter to suffer anydelusion to take place, so I turned to the young woman, and toldher we did not desire to impose upon the new convert in her firstand more ignorant understanding of things, and begged her toexplain to her that God may be very properly said to answer ourpetitions, when, in the course of His providence, such things arein a particular manner brought to pass as we petitioned for; but wedid not expect returns from heaven in a miraculous and particularmanner, and it is a mercy that it is not so.

　　This the young woman did afterwards effectually, so that there wasno priestcraft used here; and I should have thought it one of themost unjustifiable frauds in the world to have had it so.  But theeffect upon Will Atkins is really not to be expressed; and there,we may be sure, was no delusion.  Sure no man was ever morethankful in the world for anything of its kind than he was for theBible, nor, I believe, never any man was glad of a Bible from abetter principle; and though he had been a most profligatecreature, headstrong, furious, and desperately wicked, yet this manis a standing rule to us all for the well instructing children,viz. that parents should never give over to teach and instruct, norever despair of the success of their endeavours, let the childrenbe ever so refractory, or to appearance insensible to instruction;for if ever God in His providence touches the conscience of such,the force of their education turns upon them, and the earlyinstruction of parents is not lost, though it may have been manyyears laid asleep, but some time or other they may find the benefitof it.  Thus it was with this poor man:  however ignorant he was ofreligion and Christian knowledge, he found he had some to do withnow more ignorant than himself, and that the least part of theinstruction of his good father that now came to his mind was of useto him.

　　Among the rest, it occurred to him, he said, how his father used toinsist so much on the inexpressible value of the Bible, and theprivilege and blessing of it to nations, families, and persons; buthe never entertained the least notion of the worth of it till now,when, being to talk to heathens, savages, and barbarians, he wantedthe help of the written oracle for his assistance.  The young womanwas glad of it also for the present occasion, though she had one,and so had the youth, on board our ship among their goods, whichwere not yet brought on shore.  And now, having said so many thingsof this young woman, I cannot omit telling one story more of herand myself, which has something in it very instructive andremarkable.

　　I have related to what extremity the poor young woman was reduced;how her mistress was starved to death, and died on board thatunhappy ship we met at sea, and how the whole ship's company wasreduced to the last extremity.  The gentlewoman, and her son, andthis maid, were first hardly used as to provisions, and at lasttotally neglected and starved - that is to say, brought to the lastextremity of hunger.  One day, being discoursing with her on theextremities they suffered, I asked her if she could describe, bywhat she had felt, what it was to starve, and how it appeared?  Shesaid she believed she could, and told her tale very distinctlythus:-

　　"First, we had for some days fared exceedingly hard, and sufferedvery great hunger; but at last we were wholly without food of anykind except sugar, and a little wine and water.  The first dayafter I had received no food at all, I found myself towardsevening, empty and sick at the stomach, and nearer night muchinclined to yawning and sleep.  I lay down on the couch in thegreat cabin to sleep, and slept about three hours, and awaked alittle refreshed, having taken a glass of wine when I lay down;after being about three hours awake, it being about five o'clock inthe morning, I found myself empty, and my stomach sickish, and laydown again, but could not sleep at all, being very faint and ill;and thus I continued all the second day with a strange variety -first hungry, then sick again, with retchings to vomit.  The secondnight, being obliged to go to bed again without any food more thana draught of fresh water, and being asleep, I dreamed I was atBarbadoes, and that the market was mightily stocked withprovisions; that I bought some for my mistress, and went and dinedvery heartily.  I thought my stomach was full after this, as itwould have been after a good dinner; but when I awaked I wasexceedingly sunk in my spirits to find myself in the extremity offamily.  The last glass of wine we had I drank, and put sugar init, because of its having some spirit to supply nourishment; butthere being no substance in the stomach for the digesting office towork upon, I found the only effect of the wine was to raisedisagreeable fumes from the stomach into the head; and I lay, asthey told me, stupid and senseless, as one drunk, for some time.The third day, in the morning, after a night of strange, confused,and inconsistent dreams, and rather dozing than sleeping, I awakedravenous and furious with hunger; and I question, had not myunderstanding returned and conquered it, whether if I had been amother, and had had a little child with me, its life would havebeen safe or not.  This lasted about three hours, during which timeI was twice raging mad as any creature in Bedlam, as my youngmaster told me, and as he can now inform you.

　　"In one of these fits of lunacy or distraction I fell down andstruck my face against the corner of a pallet-bed, in which mymistress lay, and with the blow the blood gushed out of my nose;and the cabin-boy bringing me a little basin, I sat down and bledinto it a great deal; and as the blood came from me I came tomyself, and the violence of the flame or fever I was in abated, andso did the ravenous part of the hunger.  Then I grew sick, andretched to vomit, but could not, for I had nothing in my stomach tobring up.  After I had bled some time I swooned, and they allbelieved I was dead; but I came to myself soon after, and then hada most dreadful pain in my stomach not to be described - not likethe colic, but a gnawing, eager pain for food; and towards night itwent off with a kind of earnest wishing or longing for food.  Itook another draught of water with sugar in it; but my stomachloathed the sugar and brought it all up again; then I took adraught of water without sugar, and that stayed with me; and I laidme down upon the bed, praying most heartily that it would pleaseGod to take me away; and composing my mind in hopes of it, Islumbered a while, and then waking, thought myself dying, beinglight with vapours from an empty stomach.  I recommended my soulthen to God, and then earnestly wished that somebody would throw meinto the into the sea.

　　"All this while my mistress lay by me, just, as I thought,expiring, but she bore it with much more patience than I, and gavethe last bit of bread she had left to her child, my young master,who would not have taken it, but she obliged him to eat it; and Ibelieve it saved his life.  Towards the morning I slept again, andwhen I awoke I fell into a violent passion of crying, and afterthat had a second fit of violent hunger.  I got up ravenous, and ina most dreadful condition; and once or twice I was going to bite myown arm.  At last I saw the basin in which was the blood I had bledat my nose the day before:  I ran to it, and swallowed it with suchhaste, and such a greedy appetite, as if I wondered nobody hadtaken it before, and afraid it should be taken from me now.  Afterit was down, though the thoughts of it filled me with horror, yetit checked the fit of hunger, and I took another draught of water,and was composed and refreshed for some hours after.  This was thefourth day; and this I kept up till towards night, when, within thecompass of three hours, I had all the several circumstances overagain, one after another, viz. sick, sleepy, eagerly hungry, painin the stomach, then ravenous again, then sick, then lunatic, thencrying, then ravenous again, and so every quarter of an hour, andmy strength wasted exceedingly; at night I lay me down, having nocomfort but in the hope that I should die before morning.

　　"All this night I had no sleep; but the hunger was now turned intoa disease; and I had a terrible colic and griping, by wind insteadof food having found its way into the bowels; and in this conditionI lay till morning, when I was surprised by the cries andlamentations of my young master, who called out to me that hismother was dead.  I lifted myself up a little, for I had notstrength to rise, but found she was not dead, though she was ableto give very little signs of life.  I had then such convulsions inmy stomach, for want of some sustenance, as I cannot describe; withsuch frequent throes and pangs of appetite as nothing but thetortures of death can imitate; and in this condition I was when Iheard the seamen above cry out, 'A sail! a sail!' and halloo andjump about as if they were distracted.  I was not able to get offfrom the bed, and my mistress much less; and my young master was sosick that I thought he had been expiring; so we could not open thecabin door, or get any account what it was that occasioned suchconfusion; nor had we had any conversation with the ship's companyfor twelve days, they having told us that they had not a mouthfulof anything to eat in the ship; and this they told us afterwards -they thought we had been dead.  It was this dreadful condition wewere in when you were sent to save our lives; and how you found us,sir, you know as well as I, and better too."

　　This was her own relation, and is such a distinct account ofstarving to death, as, I confess, I never met with, and wasexceeding instructive to me.  I am the rather apt to believe it tobe a true account, because the youth gave me an account of a goodpart of it; though I must own, not so distinct and so feeling asthe maid; and the rather, because it seems his mother fed him atthe price of her own life:  but the poor maid, whose constitutionwas stronger than that of her mistress, who was in years, and aweakly woman too, might struggle harder with it; nevertheless shemight be supposed to feel the extremity something sooner than hermistress, who might be allowed to keep the last bit somethinglonger than she parted with any to relieve her maid.  No question,as the case is here related, if our ship or some other had not soprovidentially met them, but a few days more would have ended alltheir lives.  I now return to my disposition of things among thepeople.  And, first, it is to be observed here, that for manyreasons I did not think fit to let them know anything of the sloopI had framed, and which I thought of setting up among them; for Ifound, at least at my first coming, such seeds of division amongthem, that I saw plainly, had I set up the sloop, and left it amongthem, they would, upon every light disgust, have separated, andgone away from one another; or perhaps have turned pirates, and somade the island a den of thieves, instead of a plantation of soberand religious people, as I intended it; nor did I leave the twopieces of brass cannon that I had on board, or the extra twoquarter-deck guns that my nephew had provided, for the same reason.I thought it was enough to qualify them for a defensive war againstany that should invade them, but not to set them up for anoffensive war, or to go abroad to attack others; which, in the end,would only bring ruin and destruction upon them.  I reserved thesloop, therefore, and the guns, for their service another way, as Ishall observe in its place.

　　Having now done with the island, I left them all in goodcircumstances and in a flourishing condition, and went on board myship again on the 6th of May, having been about twenty-five daysamong them:  and as they were all resolved to stay upon the islandtill I came to remove them, I promised to send them further relieffrom the Brazils, if I could possibly find an opportunity.  Iparticularly promised to send them some cattle, such as sheep,hogs, and cows:  as to the two cows and calves which I brought fromEngland, we had been obliged, by the length of our voyage, to killthem at sea, for want of hay to feed them.

　　The next day, giving them a salute of five guns at parting, we setsail, and arrived at the bay of All Saints in the Brazils in abouttwenty-two days, meeting nothing remarkable in our passage butthis:  that about three days after we had sailed, being becalmed,and the current  setting strong to the ENE., running, as it were,into a bay or gulf on the land side, we were driven something outof our course, and once or twice our men cried out, "Land to theeastward!" but whether it was the continent or islands we could nottell by any means.  But the third day, towards evening, the seasmooth, and the weather calm, we saw the sea as it were coveredtowards the land with something very black; not being able todiscover what it was till after some time, our chief mate, going upthe main shrouds a little way, and looking at them with aperspective, cried out it was an army.  I could not imagine what hemeant by an army, and thwarted him a little hastily.  "Nay, sir,"says he, "don't be angry, for 'tis an army, and a fleet too:  for Ibelieve there are a thousand canoes, and you may see them paddlealong, for they are coming towards us apace."

　　I was a little surprised then, indeed, and so was my nephew thecaptain; for he had heard such terrible stories of them in theisland, and having never been in those seas before, that he couldnot tell what to think of it, but said, two or three times, weshould all be devoured.  I must confess, considering we werebecalmed, and the current set strong towards the shore, I liked itthe worse; however, I bade them not be afraid, but bring the shipto an anchor as soon as we came so near as to know that we mustengage them.  The weather continued calm, and they came on apacetowards us, so I gave orders to come to an anchor, and furl all oursails; as for the savages, I told them they had nothing to fear butfire, and therefore they should get their boats out, and fastenthem, one close by the head and the other by the stern, and manthem both well, and wait the issue in that posture:  this I did,that the men in the boats might he ready with sheets and buckets toput out any fire these savages might endeavour to fix to theoutside of the ship.

　　In this posture we lay by for them, and in a little while they cameup with us; but never was such a horrid sight seen by Christians;though my mate was much mistaken in his calculation of theirnumber, yet when they came up we reckoned about a hundred andtwenty-six canoes; some of them had sixteen or seventeen men inthem, and some more, and the least six or seven.  When they camenearer to us, they seemed to be struck with wonder andastonishment, as at a sight which doubtless they had never seenbefore; nor could they at first, as we afterwards understood, knowwhat to make of us; they came boldly up, however, very near to us,and seemed to go about to row round us; but we called to our men inthe boats not to let them come too near them.  This very orderbrought us to an engagement with them, without our designing it;for five or six of the large canoes came so near our long-boat,that our men beckoned with their hands to keep them back, whichthey understood very well, and went back:  but at their retreatabout fifty arrows came on board us from those boats, and one ofour men in the long-boat was very much wounded.  However, I calledto them not to fire by any means; but we handed down some dealboards into the boat, and the carpenter presently set up a kind offence, like waste boards, to cover them from the arrows of thesavages, if they should shoot again.

　　About half-an-hour afterwards they all came up in a body astern ofus, and so near that we could easily discern what they were, thoughwe could not tell their design; and I easily found they were someof my old friends, the same sort of savages that I had been used toengage with.  In a short time more they rowed a little farther outto sea, till they came directly broadside with us, and then roweddown straight upon us, till they came so near that they could hearus speak; upon this, I ordered all my men to keep close, lest theyshould shoot any more arrows, and made all our guns ready; butbeing so near as to be within hearing, I made Friday go out uponthe deck, and call out aloud to them in his language, to know whatthey meant.  Whether they understood him or not, that I knew not;but as soon as he had called to them, six of them, who were in theforemost or nighest boat to us, turned their canoes from us, andstooping down, showed us their naked backs; whether this was adefiance or challenge we knew not, or whether it was done in merecontempt, or as a signal to the rest; but immediately Friday criedout they were going to shoot, and, unhappily for him, poor fellow,they let fly about three hundred of their arrows, and to myinexpressible grief, killed poor Friday, no other man being intheir sight.  The poor fellow was shot with no less than threearrows, and about three more fell very near him; such unluckymarksmen they were!

　　I was so annoyed at the loss of my old trusty servant andcompanion, that I immediately ordered five guns to be loaded withsmall shot, and four with great, and gave them such a broadside asthey had never heard in their lives before.  They were not abovehalf a cable's length off when we fired; and our gunners took theiraim so well, that three or four of their canoes were overset, as wehad reason to believe, by one shot only.  The ill manners ofturning up their bare backs to us gave us no great offence; neitherdid I know for certain whether that which would pass for thegreatest contempt among us might be understood so by them or not;therefore, in return, I had only resolved to have fired four orfive guns at them with powder only, which I knew would frightenthem sufficiently:  but when they shot at us directly with all thefury they were capable of, and especially as they had killed mypoor Friday, whom I so entirely loved and valued, and who, indeed,so well deserved it, I thought myself not only justifiable beforeGod and man, but would have been very glad if I could have oversetevery canoe there, and drowned every one of them.

　　I can neither tell how many we killed nor how many we wounded atthis broadside, but sure such a fright and hurry never were seenamong such a multitude; there were thirteen or fourteen of theircanoes split and overset in all, and the men all set a-swimming:the rest, frightened out of their wits, scoured away as fast asthey could, taking but little care to save those whose boats weresplit or spoiled with our shot; so I suppose that many of them werelost; and our men took up one poor fellow swimming for his life,above an hour after they were all gone.  The small shot from ourcannon must needs kill and wound a great many; but, in short, wenever knew how it went with them, for they fled so fast, that inthree hours or thereabouts we could not see above three or fourstraggling canoes, nor did we ever see the rest any more; for abreeze of wind springing up the same evening, we weighed and setsail for the Brazils.

　　We had a prisoner, indeed, but the creature was so sullen that hewould neither cat nor speak, and we all fancied he would starvehimself to death.  But I took a way to cure him:  for I had madethem take him and turn him into the long-boat, and make him believethey would toss him into the sea again, and so leave him where theyfound him, if he would not speak; nor would that do, but theyreally did throw him into the sea, and came away from him.  Then hefollowed them, for he swam like a cork, and called to them in histongue, though they knew not one word of what he said; however atlast they took him in again., and then he began to he moretractable:  nor did I ever design they should drown him.

　　We were now under sail again, but I was the most disconsolatecreature alive for want of my man Friday, and would have been veryglad to have gone back to the island, to have taken one of the restfrom thence for my occasion, but it could not be:  so we went on.We had one prisoner, as I have said, and it was a long time beforewe could make him understand anything; but in time our men taughthim some English, and he began to be a little tractable.Afterwards, we inquired what country he came from; but could makenothing of what he said; for his speech was so odd, all gutturals,and he spoke in the throat in such a hollow, odd manner, that wecould never form a word after him; and we were all of opinion thatthey might speak that language as well if they were gagged asotherwise; nor could we perceive that they had any occasion eitherfor teeth, tongue, lips, or palate, but formed their words just asa hunting-horn forms a tune with an open throat.  He told us,however, some time after, when we had taught him to speak a littleEnglish, that they were going with their kings to fight a greatbattle.  When he said kings, we asked him how many kings?  He saidthey were five nation (we could not make him understand the plural's), and that they all joined to go against two nation.  We askedhim what made them come up to us?  He said, "To makee te greatwonder look."  Here it is to be observed that all those natives, asalso those of Africa when they learn English, always add two e's atthe end of the words where we use one; and they place the accentupon them, as makee, takee, and the like; nay, I could hardly makeFriday leave it off, though at last he did.

　　And now I name the poor fellow once more, I must take my last leaveof him.  Poor honest Friday!  We buried him with all the decencyand solemnity possible, by putting him into a coffin, and throwinghim into the sea; and I caused them to fire eleven guns for him.So ended the life of the most grateful, faithful, honest, and mostaffectionate servant that ever man had.

　　We went now away with a fair wind for Brazil; and in about twelvedays' time we made land, in the latitude of five degrees south ofthe line, being the north-easternmost land of all that part ofAmerica.  We kept on S. by E., in sight of the shore four days,when we made Cape St. Augustine, and in three days came to ananchor off the bay of All Saints, the old place of my deliverance,from whence came both my good and evil fate.  Never ship came tothis port that had less business than I had, and yet it was withgreat difficulty that we were admitted to hold the leastcorrespondence on shore:  not my partner himself, who was alive,and made a great figure among them, not my two merchant-trustees,not the fame of my wonderful preservation in the island, couldobtain me that favour.  My partner, however, remembering that I hadgiven five hundred moidores to the prior of the monastery of theAugustines, and two hundred and seventy-two to the poor, went tothe monastery, and obliged the prior that then was to go to thegovernor, and get leave for me personally, with the captain and onemore, besides eight seamen, to come on shore, and no more; and thisupon condition, absolutely capitulated for, that we should notoffer to land any goods out of the ship, or to carry any personaway without licence.  They were so strict with us as to landingany goods, that it was with extreme difficulty that I got on shorethree bales of English goods, such as fine broadcloths, stuffs, andsome linen, which I had brought for a present to my partner.

　　He was a very generous, open-hearted man, although he began, likeme, with little at first.  Though he knew not that I had the leastdesign of giving him anything, he sent me on board a present offresh provisions, wine, and sweetmeats, worth about thirtymoidores, including some tobacco, and three or four fine medals ofgold:  but I was even with him in my present, which, as I havesaid, consisted of fine broadcloth, English stuffs, lace, and fineholland; also, I delivered him about the value of one hundredpounds sterling in the same goods, for other uses; and I obligedhim to set up the sloop, which I had brought with me from England,as I have said, for the use of my colony, in order to send therefreshments I intended to my plantation.

　　Accordingly, he got hands, and finished the sloop in a very fewdays, for she was already framed; and I gave the master of her suchinstructions that he could not miss the place; nor did he, as I hadan account from my partner afterwards.  I got him soon loaded withthe small cargo I sent them; and one of our seamen, that had beenon shore with me there, offered to go with the sloop and settlethere, upon my letter to the governor Spaniard to allot him asufficient quantity of land for a plantation, and on my giving himsome clothes and tools for his planting work, which he said heunderstood, having been an old planter at Maryland, and a buccaneerinto the bargain.  I encouraged the fellow by granting all hedesired; and, as an addition, I gave him the savage whom we hadtaken prisoner of war to be his slave, and ordered the governorSpaniard to give him his share of everything he wanted with therest.

　　When we came to fit this man out, my old partner told me there wasa certain very honest fellow, a Brazil planter of his acquaintance,who had fallen into the displeasure of the Church.  "I know notwhat the matter is with him," says he, "but, on my conscience, Ithink he is a heretic in his heart, and he has been obliged toconceal himself for fear of the Inquisition." He then told me thathe would be very glad of such an opportunity to make his escape,with his wife and two daughters; and if I would let them go to myisland, and allot them a plantation, he would give them a smallstock to begin with - for the officers of the Inquisition hadseized all his effects and estate, and he had nothing left but alittle household stuff and two slaves; "and," adds he, "though Ihate his principles, yet I would not have him fall into theirhands, for he will be assuredly burned alive if he does."  Igranted this presently, and joined my Englishman with them:  and weconcealed the man, and his wife and daughters, on board our ship,till the sloop put out to go to sea; and then having put all theirgoods on board some time before, we put them on board the sloopafter she was got out of the bay.  Our seaman was mightily pleasedwith this new partner; and their stocks, indeed, were much alike,rich in tools, in preparations, and a farm - but nothing to beginwith, except as above:  however, they carried over with them whatwas worth all the rest, some materials for planting sugar-canes,with some plants of canes, which he, I mean the Brazil planter,understood very well.

　　Among the rest of the supplies sent to my tenants in the island, Isent them by the sloop three milch cows and five calves; abouttwenty-two hogs, among them three sows; two mares, and a stone-horse.  For my Spaniards, according to my promise, I engaged threeBrazil women to go, and recommended it to them to marry them, anduse them kindly.  I could have procured more women, but Iremembered that the poor persecuted man had two daughters, and thatthere were but five of the Spaniards that wanted partners; the resthad wives of their own, though in another country.  All this cargoarrived safe, and, as you may easily suppose, was very welcome tomy old inhabitants, who were now, with this addition, between sixtyand seventy people, besides little children, of which there were agreat many.  I found letters at London from them all, by way ofLisbon, when I came back to England.

　　I have now done with the island, and all manner of discourse aboutit:  and whoever reads the rest of my memorandums would do well toturn his thoughts entirely from it, and expect to read of thefollies of an old man, not warned by his own harms, much less bythose of other men, to beware; not cooled by almost forty years'miseries and disappointments - not satisfied with prosperity beyondexpectation, nor made cautious by afflictions and distress beyondexample.

　　CHAPTER IX -  DREADFUL OCCURRENCES IN MADAGASCAR

　　I HAD no more business to go to the East Indies than a man at fullliberty has to go to the turnkey at Newgate, and desire him to lockhim up among the prisoners there, and starve him.  Had I taken asmall vessel from England and gone directly to the island; had Iloaded her, as I did the other vessel, with all the necessaries forthe plantation and for my people; taken a patent from thegovernment here to have secured my property, in subjection only tothat of England; had I carried over cannon and ammunition, servantsand people to plant, and taken possession of the place, fortifiedand strengthened it in the name of England, and increased it withpeople, as I might easily have done; had I then settled myselfthere, and sent the ship back laden with good rice, as I might alsohave done in six months' time, and ordered my friends to havefitted her out again for our supply - had I done this, and stayedthere myself, I had at least acted like a man of common sense.  ButI was possessed of a wandering spirit, and scorned all advantages:I pleased myself with being the patron of the people I placedthere, and doing for them in a kind of haughty, majestic way, likean old patriarchal monarch, providing for them as if I had beenfather of the whole family, as well as of the plantation.  But Inever so much as pretended to plant in the name of any governmentor nation, or to acknowledge any prince, or to call my peoplesubjects to any one nation more than another; nay, I never so muchas gave the place a name, but left it as I found it, belonging tonobody, and the people under no discipline or government but myown, who, though I had influence over them as a father andbenefactor, had no authority or power to act or command one way orother, further than voluntary consent moved them to comply.  Yeteven this, had I stayed there, would have done well enough; but asI rambled from them, and came there no more, the last letters I hadfrom any of them were by my partner's means, who afterwards sentanother sloop to the place, and who sent me word, though I had notthe letter till I got to London, several years after it waswritten, that they went on but poorly; were discontented with theirlong stay there; that Will Atkins was dead; that five of theSpaniards were come away; and though they had not been muchmolested by the savages, yet they had had some skirmishes withthem; and that they begged of him to write to me to think of thepromise I had made to fetch them away, that they might see theircountry again before they died.

　　But I was gone a wildgoose chase indeed, and they that will haveany more of me must be content to follow me into a new variety offollies, hardships, and wild adventures, wherein the justice ofProvidence may be duly observed; and we may see how easily Heavencan gorge us with our own desires, make the strongest of our wishesbe our affliction, and punish us most severely with those verythings which we think it would be our utmost happiness to beallowed to possess.  Whether I had business or no business, away Iwent:  it is no time now to enlarge upon the reason or absurdity ofmy own conduct, but to come to the history - I was embarked for thevoyage, and the voyage I went.

　　I shall only add a word or two concerning my honest Popishclergyman, for let their opinion of us, and all other heretics ingeneral, as they call us, be as uncharitable as it may, I verilybelieve this man was very sincere, and wished the good of all men:yet I believe he used reserve in many of his expressions, toprevent giving me offence; for I scarce heard him once call on theBlessed Virgin, or mention St. Jago, or his guardian angel, thoughso common with the rest of them.  However, I say I had not theleast doubt of his sincerity and pious intentions; and I am firmlyof opinion, if the rest of the Popish missionaries were like him,they would strive to visit even the poor Tartars and Laplanders,where they have nothing to give them, as well as covet to flock toIndia, Persia, China, &c., the most wealthy of the heathencountries; for if they expected to bring no gains to their Churchby it, it may well be admired how they came to admit the ChineseConfucius into the calendar of the Christian saints.

　　A ship being ready to sail for Lisbon, my pious priest asked meleave to go thither; being still, as he observed, bound never tofinish any voyage he began.  How happy it had been for me if I hadgone with him.  But it was too late now; all things Heaven appointsfor the best:  had I gone with him I had never had so many thingsto be thankful for, and the reader had never heard of the secondpart of the travels and adventures of Robinson Crusoe:  so I musthere leave exclaiming at myself, and go on with my voyage.  Fromthe Brazils we made directly over the Atlantic Sea to the Cape ofGood Hope, and had a tolerably good voyage, our course generallysouth-east, now and then a storm, and some contrary winds; but mydisasters at sea were at an end - my future rubs and cross eventswere to befall me on shore, that it might appear the land was aswell prepared to be our scourge as the sea.

　　Our ship was on a trading voyage, and had a supercargo on board,who was to direct all her motions after she arrived at the Cape,only being limited to a certain number of days for stay, bycharter-party, at the several ports she was to go to.  This wasnone of my business, neither did I meddle with it; my nephew, thecaptain, and the supercargo adjusting all those things between themas they thought fit.  We stayed at the Cape no longer than wasneedful to take in-fresh water, but made the best of our way forthe coast of Coromandel.  We were, indeed, informed that a Frenchman-of-war, of fifty guns, and two large merchant ships, were gonefor the Indies; and as I knew we were at war with France, I hadsome apprehensions of them; but they went their own way, and weheard no more of them.

　　I shall not pester the reader with a tedious description of places,journals of our voyage, variations of the compass, latitudes,trade-winds, &c.; it is enough to name the ports and places whichwe touched at, and what occurred to us upon our passages from oneto another.  We touched first at the island of Madagascar, where,though the people are fierce and treacherous, and very well armedwith lances and bows, which they use with inconceivable dexterity,yet we fared very well with them a while.  They treated us verycivilly; and for some trifles which we gave them, such as knives,scissors, &c., they brought us eleven good fat bullocks, of amiddling size, which we took in, partly for fresh provisions forour present spending, and the rest to salt for the ship's use.

　　We were obliged to stay here some time after we had furnishedourselves with provisions; and I, who was always too curious tolook into every nook of the world wherever I came, went on shore asoften as I could.  It was on the east side of the island that wewent on shore one evening:  and the people, who, by the way, arevery numerous, came thronging about us, and stood gazing at us at adistance.  As we had traded freely with them, and had been kindlyused, we thought ourselves in no danger; but when we saw thepeople, we cut three boughs out of a tree, and stuck them up at adistance from us; which, it seems, is a mark in that country notonly of a truce and friendship, but when it is accepted the otherside set up three poles or boughs, which is a signal that theyaccept the truce too; but then this is a known condition of thetruce, that you are not to pass beyond their three poles towardsthem, nor they to come past your three poles or boughs towards you;so that you are perfectly secure within the three poles, and allthe space between your poles and theirs is allowed like a marketfor free converse, traffic, and commerce.  When you go there youmust not carry your weapons with you; and if they come into thatspace they stick up their javelins and lances all at the firstpoles, and come on unarmed; but if any violence is offered them,and the truce thereby broken, away they run to the poles, and layhold of their weapons, and the truce is at an end.

　　It happened one evening, when we went on shore, that a greaternumber of their people came down than usual, but all very friendlyand civil; and they brought several kinds of provisions, for whichwe satisfied them with such toys as we had; the women also broughtus milk and roots, and several things very acceptable to us, andall was quiet; and we made us a little tent or hut of some boughsor trees, and lay on shore all night.  I know not what was theoccasion, but I was not so well satisfied to lie on shore as therest; and the boat riding at an anchor at about a stone's cast fromthe land, with two men in her to take care of her, I made one ofthem come on shore; and getting some boughs of trees to cover usalso in the boat, I spread the sail on the bottom of the boat, andlay under the cover of the branches of the trees all night in theboat.

　　About two o'clock in the morning we heard one of our men making aterrible noise on the shore, calling out, for God's sake, to bringthe boat in and come and help them, for they were all like to bemurdered; and at the same time I heard the fire of five muskets,which was the number of guns they had, and that three times over;for it seems the natives here were not so easily frightened withguns as the savages were in America, where I had to do with them.All this while, I knew not what was the matter, but rousingimmediately from sleep with the noise, I caused the boat to bethrust in, and resolved with three fusees we had on board to landand assist our men.  We got the boat soon to the shore, but our menwere in too much haste; for being come to the shore, they plungedinto the water, to get to the boat with all the expedition theycould, being pursued by between three and four hundred men.  Ourmen were but nine in all, and only five of them had fusees withthem; the rest had pistols and swords, indeed, but they were ofsmall use to them.

　　We took up seven of our men, and with difficulty enough too, threeof them being very ill wounded; and that which was still worse was,that while we stood in the boat to take our men in, we were in asmuch danger as they were in on shore; for they poured their arrowsin upon us so thick that we were glad to barricade the side of theboat up with the benches, and two or three loose boards which, toour great satisfaction, we had by mere accident in the boat.  Andyet, had it been daylight, they are, it seems, such exact marksmen,that if they could have seen but the least part of any of us, theywould have been sure of us.  We had, by the light of the moon, alittle sight of them, as they stood pelting us from the shore withdarts and arrows; and having got ready our firearms, we gave them avolley that we could hear, by the cries of some of them, hadwounded several; however, they stood thus in battle array on theshore till break of day, which we supposed was that they might seethe better to take their aim at us.

　　In this condition we lay, and could not tell how to weigh ouranchor, or set up our sail, because we must needs stand up in theboat, and they were as sure to hit us as we were to hit a bird in atree with small shot.  We made signals of distress to the ship, andthough she rode a league off, yet my nephew, the captain, hearingour firing, and by glasses perceiving the posture we lay in, andthat we fired towards the shore, pretty well understood us; andweighing anchor with all speed, he stood as near the shore as hedurst with the ship, and then sent another boat with ten hands inher, to assist us.  We called to them not to come too near, tellingthem what condition we were in; however, they stood in near to us,and one of the men taking the end of a tow-line in his hand, andkeeping our boat between him and the enemy, so that they could notperfectly see him, swam on board us, and made fast the line to theboat:  upon which we slipped out a little cable, and leaving ouranchor behind, they towed us out of reach of the arrows; we all thewhile lying close behind the barricade we had made.  As soon as wewere got from between the ship and the shore, that we could lay herside to the shore, she ran along just by them, and poured in abroadside among them, loaded with pieces of iron and lead, smallbullets, and such stuff, besides the great shot, which made aterrible havoc among them.

　　When we were got on board and out of danger, we had time to examineinto the occasion of this fray; and indeed our supercargo, who hadbeen often in those parts, put me upon it; for he said he was surethe inhabitants would not have touched us after we had made atruce, if we had not done something to provoke them to it.  Atlength it came out that an old woman, who had come to sell us somemilk, had brought it within our poles, and a young woman with her,who also brought us some roots or herbs; and while the old woman(whether she was mother to the young woman or no they could nottell) was selling us the milk, one of our men offered some rudenessto the girl that was with her, at which the old woman made a greatnoise:  however, the seaman would not quit his prize, but carriedher out of the old woman's sight among the trees, it being almostdark; the old woman went away without her, and, as we may suppose,made an outcry among the people she came from; who, upon notice,raised that great army upon us in three or four hours, and it wasgreat odds but we had all been destroyed.

　　One of our men was killed with a lance thrown at him just at thebeginning of the attack, as he sallied out of the tent they hadmade; the rest came off free, all but the fellow who was theoccasion of all the mischief, who paid dear enough for hisbrutality, for we could not hear what became of him for a greatwhile.  We lay upon the shore two days after, though the windpresented, and made signals for him, and made our boat sail upshore and down shore several leagues, but in vain; so we wereobliged to give him over; and if he alone had suffered for it, theloss had been less.  I could not satisfy myself, however, withoutventuring on shore once more, to try if I could learn anything ofhim or them; it was the third night after the action that I had agreat mind to learn, if I could by any means, what mischief we haddone, and how the game stood on the Indians' side.  I was carefulto do it in the dark, lest we should be attacked again:  but Iought indeed to have been sure that the men I went with had beenunder my command, before I engaged in a thing so hazardous andmischievous as I was brought into by it, without design.

　　We took twenty as stout fellows with us as any in the ship, besidesthe supercargo and myself, and we landed two hours before midnight,at the same place where the Indians stood drawn up in the eveningbefore.  I landed here, because my design, as I have said, waschiefly to see if they had quitted the field, and if they had leftany marks behind them of the mischief we had done them, and Ithought if we could surprise one or two of them, perhaps we mightget our man again, by way of exchange.

　　We landed without any noise, and divided our men into two bodies,whereof the boatswain commanded one and I the other.  We neithersaw nor heard anybody stir when we landed:  and we marched up, onebody at a distance from another, to the place.  At first we couldsee nothing, it being very dark; till by-and-by our boatswain, wholed the first party, stumbled and fell over a dead body.  This madethem halt a while; for knowing by the circumstances that they wereat the place where the Indians had stood, they waited for my comingup there.  We concluded to halt till the moon began to rise, whichwe knew would be in less than an hour, when we could easily discernthe havoc we had made among them.  We told thirty-two bodies uponthe ground, whereof two were not quite dead; some had an arm andsome a leg shot off, and one his head; those that were wounded, wesupposed, they had carried away.  When we had made, as I thought, afull discovery of all we could come to the knowledge of, I resolvedon going on board; but the boatswain and his party sent me wordthat they were resolved to make a visit to the Indian town, wherethese dogs, as they called them, dwelt, and asked me to go alongwith them; and if they could find them, as they still fancied theyshould, they did not doubt of getting a good booty; and it might bethey might find Tom Jeffry there:  that was the man's name we hadlost.

　　Had they sent to ask my leave to go, I knew well enough what answerto have given them; for I should have commanded them instantly onboard, knowing it was not a hazard fit for us to run, who had aship and ship-loading in our charge, and a voyage to make whichdepended very much upon the lives of the men; but as they sent meword they were resolved to go, and only asked me and my company togo along with them, I positively refused it, and rose up, for I wassitting on the ground, in order to go to the boat.  One or two ofthe men began to importune me to go; and when I refused, began togrumble, and say they were not under my command, and they would go."Come, Jack," says one of the men, "will you go with me?  I'll gofor one."  Jack said he would - and then another - and, in a word,they all left me but one, whom I persuaded to stay, and a boy leftin the boat.  So the supercargo and I, with the third man, wentback to the boat, where we told them we would stay for them, andtake care to take in as many of them as should be left; for I toldthem it was a mad thing they were going about, and supposed most ofthem would have the fate of Tom Jeffry.

　　They told me, like seamen, they would warrant it they would comeoff again, and they would take care, &c.; so away they went.  Ientreated them to consider the ship and the voyage, that theirlives were not their own, and that they were entrusted with thevoyage, in some measure; that if they miscarried, the ship might belost for want of their help, and that they could not answer for itto God or man.  But I might as well have talked to the mainmast ofthe ship:  they were mad upon their journey; only they gave me goodwords, and begged I would not be angry; that they did not doubt butthey would be back again in about an hour at furthest; for theIndian town, they said, was not above half-a mile off, though theyfound it above two miles before they got to it.

　　Well, they all went away, and though the attempt was desperate, andsuch as none but madmen would have gone about, yet, to give themtheir due, they went about it as warily as boldly; they weregallantly armed, for they had every man a fusee or musket, abayonet, and a pistol; some of them had broad cutlasses, some ofthem had hangers, and the boatswain and two more had poleaxes;besides all which they had among them thirteen hand grenadoes.Bolder fellows, and better provided, never went about any wickedwork in the world.  When they went out their chief design wasplunder, and they were in mighty hopes of finding gold there; but acircumstance which none of them were aware of set them on fire withrevenge, and made devils of them all.

　　When they came to the few Indian houses which they thought had beenthe town, which was not above half a mile off, they were undergreat disappointment, for there were not above twelve or thirteenhouses, and where the town was, or how big, they knew not.  Theyconsulted, therefore, what to do, and were some time before theycould resolve; for if they fell upon these, they must cut all theirthroats; and it was ten to one but some of them might escape, itbeing in the night, though the moon was up; and if one escaped, hewould run and raise all the town, so they should have a whole armyupon them; on the other hand, if they went away and left thoseuntouched, for the people were all asleep, they could not tellwhich way to look for the town; however, the last was the bestadvice, so they resolved to leave them, and look for the town aswell as they could.  They went on a little way, and found a cowtied to a tree; this, they presently concluded, would be a goodguide to them; for, they said, the cow certainly belonged to thetown before them, or the town behind them, and if they untied her,they should see which way she went:  if she went back, they hadnothing to say to her; but if she went forward, they would followher.  So they cut the cord, which was made of twisted flags, andthe cow went on before them, directly to the town; which, as theyreported, consisted of above two hundred houses or huts, and insome of these they found several families living together.

　　Here they found all in silence, as profoundly secure as sleep couldmake them:  and first, they called another council, to considerwhat they had to do; and presently resolved to divide themselvesinto three bodies, and so set three houses on fire in three partsof the town; and as the men came out, to seize them and bind them(if any resisted, they need not be asked what to do then), and soto search the rest of the houses for plunder:  but they resolved tomarch silently first through the town, and see what dimensions itwas of, and if they might venture upon it or no.

　　They did so, and desperately resolved that they would venture uponthem:  but while they were animating one another to the work, threeof them, who were a little before the rest, called out aloud tothem, and told them that they had found - Tom Jeffry:  they all ranup to the place, where they found the poor fellow hanging up nakedby one arm, and his throat cut.  There was an Indian house just bythe tree, where they found sixteen or seventeen of the principalIndians, who had been concerned in the fray with us before, and twoor three of them wounded with our shot; and our men found they wereawake, and talking one to another in that house, but knew not theirnumber.

　　The sight of their poor mangled comrade so enraged them, as before,that they swore to one another that they would be revenged, andthat not an Indian that came into their hands should have anyquarter; and to work they went immediately, and yet not so madly asmight be expected from the rage and fury they were in.  Their firstcare was to get something that would soon take fire, but, after alittle search, they found that would be to no purpose; for most ofthe houses were low, and thatched with flags and rushes, of whichthe country is full; so they presently made some wildfire, as wecall it, by wetting a little powder in the palm of their hands, andin a quarter of an hour they set the town on fire in four or fiveplaces, and particularly that house where the Indians were not goneto bed.

　　As soon as the fire begun to blaze, the poor frightened creaturesbegan to rush out to save their lives, but met with their fate inthe attempt; and especially at the door, where they drove themback, the boatswain himself killing one or two with his poleaxe.The house being large, and many in it, he did not care to go in,but called for a hand grenado, and threw it among them, which atfirst frightened them, but, when it burst, made such havoc amongthem that they cried out in a hideous manner.  In short, most ofthe Indians who were in the open part of the house were killed orhurt with the grenado, except two or three more who pressed to thedoor, which the boatswain and two more kept, with their bayonets onthe muzzles of their pieces, and despatched all that came in theirway; but there was another apartment in the house, where the princeor king, or whatever he was, and several others were; and thesewere kept in till the house, which was by this time all in a lightflame, fell in upon them, and they were smothered together.

　　All this while they fired not a gun, because they would not wakenthe people faster than they could master them; but the fire beganto waken them fast enough, and our fellows were glad to keep alittle together in bodies; for the fire grew so raging, all thehouses being made of light combustible stuff, that they couldhardly bear the street between them.  Their business was to followthe fire, for the surer execution:  as fast as the fire eitherforced the people out of those houses which were burning, orfrightened them out of others, our people were ready at their doorsto knock them on the head, still calling and hallooing one toanother to remember Tom Jeffry.

　　While this was doing, I must confess I was very uneasy, andespecially when I saw the flames of the town, which, it beingnight, seemed to be close by me.  My nephew, the captain, who wasroused by his men seeing such a fire, was very uneasy, not knowingwhat the matter was, or what danger I was in, especially hearingthe guns too, for by this time they began to use their firearms; athousand thoughts oppressed his mind concerning me and thesupercargo, what would become of us; and at last, though he couldill spare any more men, yet not knowing what exigence we might bein, he took another boat, and with thirteen men and himself cameashore to me.

　　He was surprised to see me and the supercargo in the boat with nomore than two men; and though he was glad that we were well, yet hewas in the same impatience with us to know what was doing; for thenoise continued, and the flame increased; in short, it was next toan impossibility for any men in the world to restrain theircuriosity to know what had happened, or their concern for thesafety of the men:  in a word, the captain told me he would go andhelp his men, let what would come.  I argued with him, as I didbefore with the men, the safety of the ship, the danger of thevoyage, the interests of the owners and merchants, &c., and toldhim I and the two men would go, and only see if we could at adistance learn what was likely to be the event, and come back andtell him.  It was in vain to talk to my nephew, as it was to talkto the rest before; he would go, he said; and he only wished he hadleft but ten men in the ship, for he could not think of having hismen lost for want of help:  he had rather lose the ship, thevoyage, and his life, and all; and away he went.

　　I was no more able to stay behind now than I was to persuade themnot to go; so the captain ordered two men to row back the pinnace,and fetch twelve men more, leaving the long-boat at an anchor; andthat, when they came back, six men should keep the two boats, andsix more come after us; so that he left only sixteen men in theship:  for the whole ship's company consisted of sixty-five men,whereof two were lost in the late quarrel which brought thismischief on.

　　Being now on the march, we felt little of the ground we trod on;and being guided by the fire, we kept no path, but went directly tothe place of the flame.  If the noise of the guns was surprising tous before, the cries of the poor people were now quite of anothernature, and filled us with horror.  I must confess I was never atthe sacking a city, or at the taking a town by storm.  I had heardof Oliver Cromwell taking Drogheda, in Ireland, and killing man,woman, and child; and I had read of Count Tilly sacking the city ofMagdeburg and cutting the throats of twenty-two thousand of allsexes; but I never had an idea of the thing itself before, nor isit possible to describe it, or the horror that was upon our mindsat hearing it.  However, we went on, and at length came to thetown, though there was no entering the streets of it for the fire.The first object we met with was the ruins of a hut or house, orrather the ashes of it, for the house was consumed; and just beforeit, plainly now to be seen by the light of the fire, lay four menand three women, killed, and, as we thought, one or two more lay inthe heap among the fire; in short, there were such instances ofrage, altogether barbarous, and of a fury something beyond what washuman, that we thought it impossible our men could be guilty of it;or, if they were the authors of it, we thought they ought to beevery one of them put to the worst of deaths.  But this was notall:  we saw the fire increase forward, and the cry went on just asthe fire went on; so that we were in the utmost confusion.  Weadvanced a little way farther, and behold, to our astonishment,three naked women, and crying in a most dreadful manner, cameflying as if they had wings, and after them sixteen or seventeenmen, natives, in the same terror and consternation, with three ofour English butchers in the rear, who, when they could not overtakethem, fired in among them, and one that was killed by their shotfell down in our sight.  When the rest saw us, believing us to betheir enemies, and that we would murder them as well as those thatpursued them, they set up a most dreadful shriek, especially thewomen; and two of them fell down, as if already dead, with thefright.

　　My very soul shrunk within me, and my blood ran chill in my veins,when I saw this; and, I believe, had the three English sailors thatpursued them come on, I had made our men kill them all; however, wetook some means to let the poor flying creatures know that we wouldnot hurt them; and immediately they came up to us, and kneelingdown, with their hands lifted up, made piteous lamentation to us tosave them, which we let them know we would:  whereupon they creptall together in a huddle close behind us, as for protection.  Ileft my men drawn up together, and, charging them to hurt nobody,but, if possible, to get at some of our people, and see what devilit was possessed them, and what they intended to do, and to commandthem off; assuring them that if they stayed till daylight theywould have a hundred thousand men about their ears:  I say I leftthem, and went among those flying people, taking only two of ourmen with me; and there was, indeed, a piteous spectacle among them.Some of them had their feet terribly burned with trampling andrunning through the fire; others their hands burned; one of thewomen had fallen down in the fire, and was very much burned beforeshe could get out again; and two or three of the men had cuts intheir backs and thighs, from our men pursuing; and another was shotthrough the body and died while I was there.

　　I would fain have learned what the occasion of all this was; but Icould not understand one word they said; though, by signs, Iperceived some of them knew not what was the occasion themselves.I was so terrified in my thoughts at this outrageous attempt that Icould not stay there, but went back to my own men, and resolved togo into the middle of the town, through the fire, or whatever mightbe in the way, and put an end to it, cost what it would;accordingly, as I came back to my men, I told them my resolution,and commanded them to follow me, when, at the very moment, camefour of our men, with the boatswain at their head, roving overheaps of bodies they had killed, all covered with blood and dust,as if they wanted more people to massacre, when our men hallooed tothem as loud as they could halloo; and with much ado one of themmade them hear, so that they knew who we were, and came up to us.

　　As soon as the boatswain saw us, he set up a halloo like a shout oftriumph, for having, as he thought, more help come; and withoutwaiting to hear me, "Captain," says he, "noble captain!  I am gladyou are come; we have not half done yet.  Villainous hell-hounddogs!  I'll kill as many of them as poor Tom has hairs upon hishead:  we have sworn to spare none of them; we'll root out the verynation of them from the earth;" and thus he ran on, out of breath,too, with action, and would not give us leave to speak a word.  Atlast, raising my voice that I might silence him a little,"Barbarous dog!" said I, "what are you doing!  I won't have onecreature touched more, upon pain of death; I charge you, upon yourlife, to stop your hands, and stand still here, or you are a deadman this minute." - "Why, sir," says he, "do you know what you do,or what they have done?  If you want a reason for what we havedone, come hither;" and with that he showed me the poor fellowhanging, with his throat cut.

　　I confess I was urged then myself, and at another time would havebeen forward enough; but I thought they had carried their rage toofar, and remembered Jacob's words to his sons Simeon and Levi:"Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for itwas cruel."  But I had now a new task upon my hands; for when themen I had carried with me saw the sight, as I had done, I had asmuch to do to restrain them as I should have had with the others;nay, my nephew himself fell in with them, and told me, in theirhearing, that he was only concerned for fear of the men beingoverpowered; and as to the people, he thought not one of them oughtto live; for they had all glutted themselves with the murder of thepoor man, and that they ought to be used like murderers.  Uponthese words, away ran eight of my men, with the boatswain and hiscrew, to complete their bloody work; and I, seeing it quite out ofmy power to restrain them, came away pensive and sad; for I couldnot bear the sight, much less the horrible noise and cries of thepoor wretches that fell into their hands.

　　I got nobody to come back with me but the supercargo and two men,and with these walked back to the boat.  It was a very great pieceof folly in me, I confess, to venture back, as it were, alone; foras it began now to be almost day, and the alarm had run over thecountry, there stood about forty men armed with lances and boughsat the little place where the twelve or thirteen houses stood,mentioned before:  but by accident I missed the place, and camedirectly to the seaside, and by the time I got to the seaside itwas broad day:  immediately I took the pinnace and went on board,and sent her back to assist the men in what might happen.  Iobserved, about the time that I came to the boat-side, that thefire was pretty well out, and the noise abated; but in about half-an-hour after I got on board, I heard a volley of our men'sfirearms, and saw a great smoke.  This, as I understood afterwards,was our men falling upon the men, who, as I said, stood at the fewhouses on the way, of whom they killed sixteen or seventeen, andset all the houses on fire, but did not meddle with the women orchildren.

　　By the time the men got to the shore again with the pinnace our menbegan to appear; they came dropping in, not in two bodies as theywent, but straggling here and there in such a manner, that a smallforce of resolute men might have cut them all off.  But the dreadof them was upon the whole country; and the men were surprised, andso frightened, that I believe a hundred of them would have fled atthe sight of but five of our men.  Nor in all this terrible actionwas there a man that made any considerable defence:  they were sosurprised between the terror of the fire and the sudden attack ofour men in the dark, that they knew not which way to turnthemselves; for if they fled one way they were met by one party, ifback again by another, so that they were everywhere knocked down;nor did any of our men receive the least hurt, except one thatsprained his foot, and another that had one of his hands burned.

　　CHAPTER X - HE IS LEFT ON SHORE

　　I WAS very angry with my nephew, the captain, and indeed with allthe men, but with him in particular, as well for his acting so outof his duty as a commander of the ship, and having the charge ofthe voyage upon him, as in his prompting, rather than cooling, therage of his blind men in so bloody and cruel an enterprise.  Mynephew answered me very respectfully, but told me that when he sawthe body of the poor seaman whom they had murdered in so cruel andbarbarous a manner, he was not master of himself, neither could hegovern his passion; he owned he should not have done so, as he wascommander of the ship; but as he was a man, and nature moved him,he could not bear it.  As for the rest of the men, they were notsubject to me at all, and they knew it well enough; so they took nonotice of my dislike.  The next day we set sail, so we never heardany more of it.  Our men differed in the account of the number theyhad killed; but according to the best of their accounts, put alltogether, they killed or destroyed about one hundred and fiftypeople, men, women, and children, and left not a house standing inthe town.  As for the poor fellow Tom Jeffry, as he was quite dead(for his throat was so cut that his head was half off), it would dohim no service to bring him away; so they only took him down fromthe tree, where he was hanging by one hand.

　　However just our men thought this action, I was against them in it,and I always, after that time, told them God would blast thevoyage; for I looked upon all the blood they shed that night to bemurder in them.  For though it is true that they had killed TomJeffry, yet Jeffry was the aggressor, had broken the truce, and hadill-used a young woman of theirs, who came down to them innocently,and on the faith of the public capitulation.

　　The boatswain defended this quarrel when we were afterwards onboard.  He said it was true that we seemed to break the truce, butreally had not; and that the war was begun the night before by thenatives themselves, who had shot at us, and killed one of our menwithout any just provocation; so that as we were in a capacity tofight them now, we might also be in a capacity to do ourselvesjustice upon them in an extraordinary manner; that though the poorman had taken a little liberty with the girl, he ought not to havebeen murdered, and that in such a villainous manner:  and that theydid nothing but what was just and what the laws of God allowed tobe done to murderers.  One would think this should have been enoughto have warned us against going on shore amongst the heathens andbarbarians; but it is impossible to make mankind wise but at theirown expense, and their experience seems to be always of most use tothem when it is dearest bought.

　　We were now bound to the Gulf of Persia, and from thence to thecoast of Coromandel, only to touch at Surat; but the chief of thesupercargo's design lay at the Bay of Bengal, where, if he missedhis business outward-bound, he was to go out to China, and returnto the coast as he came home.  The first disaster that befell uswas in the Gulf of Persia, where five of our men, venturing onshore on the Arabian side of the gulf, were surrounded by theArabians, and either all killed or carried away into slavery; therest of the boat's crew were not able to rescue them, and had butjust time to get off their boat.  I began to upbraid them with thejust retribution of Heaven in this case; but the boatswain verywarmly told me, he thought I went further in my censures than Icould show any warrant for in Scripture; and referred to Luke xiii.4, where our Saviour intimates that those men on whom the Tower ofSiloam fell were not sinners above all the Galileans; but thatwhich put me to silence in the case was, that not one of these fivemen who were now lost were of those who went on shore to themassacre of Madagascar, so I always called it, though our men couldnot bear to hear the word MASSACRE with any patience.

　　But my frequent preaching to them on this subject had worseconsequences than I expected; and the boatswain, who had been thehead of the attempt, came up boldly to me one time, and told me hefound that I brought that affair continually upon the stage; that Imade unjust reflections upon it, and had used the men very ill onthat account, and himself in particular; that as I was but apassenger, and had no command in the ship, or concern in thevoyage, they were not obliged to bear it; that they did not knowbut I might have some ill-design in my head, and perhaps to callthem to an account for it when they came to England; and that,therefore, unless I would resolve to have done with it, and alsonot to concern myself any further with him, or any of his affairs,he would leave the ship; for he did not think it safe to sail withme among them.

　　I heard him patiently enough till he had done, and then told himthat I confessed I had all along opposed the massacre ofMadagascar, and that I had, on all occasions, spoken my mind freelyabout it, though not more upon him than any of the rest; that as tohaving no command in the ship, that was true; nor did I exerciseany authority, only took the liberty of speaking my mind in thingswhich publicly concerned us all; and what concern I had in thevoyage was none of his business; that I was a considerable owner inthe ship.  In that claim I conceived I had a right to speak evenfurther than I had done, and would not be accountable to him or anyone else, and began to be a little warm with him.  He made butlittle reply to me at that time, and I thought the affair had beenover.  We were at this time in the road at Bengal; and beingwilling to see the place, I went on shore with the supercargo inthe ship's boat to divert myself; and towards evening was preparingto go on board, when one of the men came to me, and told me hewould not have me trouble myself to come down to the boat, for theyhad orders not to carry me on board any more.  Any one may guesswhat a surprise I was in at so insolent a message; and I asked theman who bade him deliver that message to me?  He told me thecoxswain.

　　I immediately found out the supercargo, and told him the story,adding that I foresaw there would be a mutiny in the ship; andentreated him to go immediately on board and acquaint the captainof it.  But I might have spared this intelligence, for before I hadspoken to him on shore the matter was effected on board.  Theboatswain, the gunner, the carpenter, and all the inferiorofficers, as soon as I was gone off in the boat, came up, anddesired to speak with the captain; and then the boatswain, making along harangue, and repeating all he had said to me, told thecaptain that as I was now gone peaceably on shore, they were loathto use any violence with me, which, if I had not gone on shore,they would otherwise have done, to oblige me to have gone.  Theytherefore thought fit to tell him that as they shipped themselvesto serve in the ship under his command, they would perform it welland faithfully; but if I would not quit the ship, or the captainoblige me to quit it, they would all leave the ship, and sail nofurther with him; and at that word ALL he turned his face towardsthe main-mast, which was, it seems, a signal agreed on, when theseamen, being got together there, cried out, "ONE AND ALL! ONE ANDALL!"

　　My nephew, the captain, was a man of spirit, and of great presenceof mind; and though he was surprised, yet he told them calmly thathe would consider of the matter, but that he could do nothing in ittill he had spoken to me about it.  He used some arguments withthem, to show them the unreasonableness and injustice of the thing,but it was all in vain; they swore, and shook hands round beforehis face, that they would all go on shore unless he would engage tothem not to suffer me to come any more on board the ship.

　　This was a hard article upon him, who knew his obligation to me,and did not know how I might take it.  So he began to talk smartlyto them; told them that I was a very considerable owner of theship, and that if ever they came to England again it would costthem very dear; that the ship was mine, and that he could not putme out of it; and that he would rather lose the ship, and thevoyage too, than disoblige me so much:  so they might do as theypleased.  However, he would go on shore and talk with me, andinvited the boatswain to go with him, and perhaps they mightaccommodate the matter with me.  But they all rejected theproposal, and said they would have nothing to do with me any more;and if I came on board they would all go on shore.  "Well," saidthe captain, "if you are all of this mind, let me go on shore andtalk with him."  So away he came to me with this account, a littleafter the message had been brought to me from the coxswain.

　　I was very glad to see my nephew, I must confess; for I was notwithout apprehensions that they would confine him by violence, setsail, and run away with the ship; and then I had been strippednaked in a remote country, having nothing to help myself; in short,I had been in a worse case than when I was alone in the island.But they had not come to that length, it seems, to my satisfaction;and when my nephew told me what they had said to him, and how theyhad sworn and shook hands that they would, one and all, leave theship if I was suffered to come on board, I told him he should notbe concerned at it at all, for I would stay on shore.  I onlydesired he would take care and send me all my necessary things onshore, and leave me a sufficient sum of money, and I would find myway to England as well as I could.  This was a heavy piece of newsto my nephew, but there was no way to help it but to comply; so, inshort, he went on board the ship again, and satisfied the men thathis uncle had yielded to their importunity, and had sent for hisgoods from on board the ship; so that the matter was over in a fewhours, the men returned to their duty, and I began to consider whatcourse I should steer.

　　I was now alone in a most remote part of the world, for I was nearthree thousand leagues by sea farther off from England than I wasat my island; only, it is true, I might travel here by land overthe Great Mogul's country to Surat, might go from thence to Bassoraby sea, up the Gulf of Persia, and take the way of the caravans,over the desert of Arabia, to Aleppo and Scanderoon; from thence bysea again to Italy, and so overland into France.  I had another waybefore me, which was to wait for some English ships, which werecoming to Bengal from Achin, on the island of Sumatra, and getpassage on board them from England.  But as I came hither withoutany concern with the East Indian Company, so it would be difficultto go from hence without their licence, unless with great favour ofthe captains of the ships, or the company's factors:  and to both Iwas an utter stranger.

　　Here I had the mortification to see the ship set sail without me;however, my nephew left me two servants, or rather one companionand one servant; the first was clerk to the purser, whom he engagedto go with me, and the other was his own servant.  I then took agood lodging in the house of an Englishwoman, where severalmerchants lodged, some French, two Italians, or rather Jews, andone Englishman.  Here I stayed above nine months, considering whatcourse to take.  I had some English goods with me of value, and aconsiderable sum of money; my nephew furnishing me with a thousandpieces of eight, and a letter of credit for more if I had occasion,that I might not be straitened, whatever might happen.  I quicklydisposed of my goods to advantage; and, as I originally intended, Ibought here some very good diamonds, which, of all other things,were the most proper for me in my present circumstances, because Icould always carry my whole estate about me.

　　During my stay here many proposals were made for my return toEngland, but none falling out to my mind, the English merchant wholodged with me, and whom I had contracted an intimate acquaintancewith, came to me one morning, saying:  "Countryman, I have aproject to communicate, which, as it suits with my thoughts, may,for aught I know, suit with yours also, when you shall havethoroughly considered it.  Here we are posted, you by accident andI by my own choice, in a part of the world very remote from our owncountry; but it is in a country where, by us who understand tradeand business, a great deal of money is to be got.  If you will putone thousand pounds to my one thousand pounds, we will hire a shiphere, the first we can get to our minds.  You shall be captain,I'll be merchant, and we'll go a trading voyage to China; for whatshould we stand still for?  The whole world is in motion; whyshould we be idle?"

　　I liked this proposal very well; and the more so because it seemedto be expressed with so much goodwill.  In my loose, unhingedcircumstances, I was the fitter to embrace a proposal for trade, orindeed anything else.  I might perhaps say with some truth, that iftrade was not my element, rambling was; and no proposal for seeingany part of the world which I had never seen before could possiblycome amiss to me.  It was, however, some time before we could get aship to our minds, and when we had got a vessel, it was not easy toget English sailors - that is to say, so many as were necessary togovern the voyage and manage the sailors which we should pick upthere.  After some time we got a mate, a boatswain, and a gunner,English; a Dutch carpenter, and three foremast men.  With these wefound we could do well enough, having Indian seamen, such as theywere, to make up.

　　When all was ready we set sail for Achin, in the island of Sumatra,and from thence to Siam, where we exchanged some of our wares foropium and some arrack; the first a commodity which bears a greatprice among the Chinese, and which at that time was much wantedthere.  Then we went up to Saskan, were eight months out, and onour return to Bengal I was very well satisfied with my adventure.Our people in England often admire how officers, which the companysend into India, and the merchants which generally stay there, getsuch very great estates as they do, and sometimes come home worthsixty or seventy thousand pounds at a time; but it is little matterfor wonder, when we consider the innumerable ports and places wherethey have a free commerce; indeed, at the ports where the Englishships come there is such great and constant demands for the growthof all other countries, that there is a certain vent for thereturns, as well as a market abroad for the goods carried out.

　　I got so much money by my first adventure, and such an insight intothe method of getting more, that had I been twenty years younger, Ishould have been tempted to have stayed here, and sought no fartherfor making my fortune; but what was all this to a man upwards ofthreescore, that was rich enough, and came abroad more in obedienceto a restless desire of seeing the world than a covetous desire ofgaining by it?  A restless desire it really was, for when I was athome I was restless to go abroad; and when I was abroad I wasrestless to be at home.  I say, what was this gain to me?  I wasrich enough already, nor had I any uneasy desires about gettingmore money; therefore the profit of the voyage to me was of nogreat force for the prompting me forward to further undertakings.Hence, I thought that by this voyage I had made no progress at all,because I was come back, as I might call it, to the place fromwhence I came, as to a home:  whereas, my eye, like that whichSolomon speaks of, was never satisfied with seeing.  I was comeinto a part of the world which I was never in before, and thatpart, in particular, which I heard much of, and was resolved to seeas much of it as I could:  and then I thought I might say I hadseen all the world that was worth seeing.

　　But my fellow-traveller and I had different notions:  I acknowledgehis were the more suited to the end of a merchant's life:  who,when he is abroad upon adventures, is wise to stick to that, as thebest thing for him, which he is likely to get the most money by.On the other hand, mine was the notion of a mad, rambling boy, thatnever cares to see a thing twice over.  But this was not all:  Ihad a kind of impatience upon me to be nearer home, and yet anunsettled resolution which way to go.  In the interval of theseconsultations, my friend, who was always upon the search forbusiness, proposed another voyage among the Spice Islands, to bringhome a loading of cloves from the Manillas, or thereabouts.

　　We were not long in preparing for this voyage; the chief difficultywas in bringing me to come into it.  However, at last, nothing elseoffering, and as sitting still, to me especially, was theunhappiest part of life, I resolved on this voyage too, which wemade very successfully, touching at Borneo and several otherislands, and came home in about five months, when we sold ourspices, with very great profit, to the Persian merchants, whocarried them away to the Gulf.  My friend, when we made up thisaccount, smiled at me:  "Well, now," said he, with a sort offriendly rebuke on my indolent temper, "is not this better thanwalking about here, like a man with nothing to do, and spending ourtime in staring at the nonsense and ignorance of the Pagans?" -"Why, truly," said I, "my friend, I think it is, and I begin to bea convert to the principles of merchandising; but I must tell you,by the way, you do not know what I am doing; for if I once conquermy backwardness, and embark heartily, old as I am, I shall harassyou up and down the world till I tire you; for I shall pursue it soeagerly, I shall never let you lie still."

　　CHAPTER XI - WARNED OF DANGER BY A COUNTRYMAN

　　A LITTLE while after this there came in a Dutch ship from Batavia;she was a coaster, not an European trader, of about two hundredtons burden; the men, as they pretended, having been so sickly thatthe captain had not hands enough to go to sea with, so he lay by atBengal; and having, it seems, got money enough, or being willing,for other reasons, to go for Europe, he gave public notice he wouldsell his ship.  This came to my ears before my new partner heard ofit, and I had a great mind to buy it; so I went to him and told himof it.  He considered a while, for he was no rash man neither; andat last replied, "She is a little too big - however, we will haveher."  Accordingly, we bought the ship, and agreeing with themaster, we paid for her, and took possession.  When we had done sowe resolved to engage the men, if we could, to join with those wehad, for the pursuing our business; but, on a sudden, they havingreceived not their wages, but their share of the money, as weafterwards learned, not one of them was to be found; we inquiredmuch about them, and at length were told that they were all gonetogether by land to Agra, the great city of the Mogul's residence,to proceed from thence to Surat, and then go by sea to the Gulf ofPersia.

　　Nothing had so much troubled me a good while as that I should missthe opportunity of going with them; for such a ramble, I thought,and in such company as would both have guarded and diverted me,would have suited mightily with my great design; and I should haveboth seen the world and gone homeward too.  But I was much bettersatisfied a few days after, when I came to know what sort offellows they were; for, in short, their history was, that this manthey called captain was the gunner only, not the commander; thatthey had been a trading voyage, in which they had been attacked onshore by some of the Malays, who had killed the captain and threeof his men; and that after the captain was killed, these men,eleven in number, having resolved to run away with the ship,brought her to Bengal, leaving the mate and five men more on shore.

　　Well, let them get the ship how they would, we came honestly byher, as we thought, though we did not, I confess, examine intothings so exactly as we ought; for we never inquired anything ofthe seamen, who would certainly have faltered in their account, andcontradicted one another.  Somehow or other we should have hadreason to have suspected, them; but the man showed us a bill ofsale for the ship, to one Emanuel Clostershoven, or some such name,for I suppose it was all a forgery, and called himself by thatname, and we could not contradict him:  and withal, having nosuspicion of the thing, we went through with our bargain.  Wepicked up some more English sailors here after this, and someDutch, and now we resolved on a second voyage to the south-east forcloves, &c. - that is to say, among the Philippine and Malaccaisles.  In short, not to fill up this part of my story with trifleswhen what is to come is so remarkable, I spent, from first to last,six years in this country, trading from port to port, backward andforward, and with very good success, and was now the last year withmy new partner, going in the ship above mentioned, on a voyage toChina, but designing first to go to Siam to buy rice.

　　In this voyage, being by contrary winds obliged to beat up and downa great while in the Straits of Malacca and among the islands, wewere no sooner got clear of those difficult seas than we found ourship had sprung a leak, but could not discover where it was.  Thisforced us to make some port; and my partner, who knew the countrybetter than I did, directed the captain to put into the river ofCambodia; for I had made the English mate, one Mr. Thompson,captain, not being willing to take the charge of the ship uponmyself.  This river lies on the north side of the great bay or gulfwhich goes up to Siam.  While we were here, and going often onshore for refreshment, there comes to me one day an Englishman, agunner's mate on board an English East India ship, then riding inthe same river.  "Sir," says he, addressing me, "you are a strangerto me, and I to you; but I have something to tell you that verynearly concerns you.  I am moved by the imminent danger you are in,and, for aught I see, you have no knowledge of it." - "I know nodanger I am in," said I, "but that my ship is leaky, and I cannotfind it out; but I intend to lay her aground to-morrow, to see if Ican find it." - "But, sir," says he, "leaky or not leaky, you willbe wiser than to lay your ship on shore to-morrow when you hearwhat I have to say to you.  Do you know, sir," said he, "the townof Cambodia lies about fifteen leagues up the river; and there aretwo large English ships about five leagues on this side, and threeDutch?" - "Well," said I, "and what is that to me?" - "Why, sir,"said be, "is it for a man that is upon such adventures as you areto come into a port, and not examine first what ships there arethere, and whether he is able to deal with them?  I suppose you donot think you are a match for them?"  I could not conceive what hemeant; and I turned short upon him, and said:  "I wish you wouldexplain yourself; I cannot imagine what reason I have to be afraidof any of the company's ships, or Dutch ships.  I am no interloper.What can they have to say to me?" - "Well, sir," says he, with asmile, "if you think yourself secure you must take your chance; buttake my advice, if you do not put to sea immediately, you will thevery next tide be attacked by five longboats full of men, andperhaps if you are taken you will be hanged for a pirate, and theparticulars be examined afterwards.  I thought, sir," added he, "Ishould have met with a better reception than this for doing you apiece of service of such importance." - "I can never beungrateful," said I, "for any service, or to any man that offers meany kindness; but it is past my comprehension what they should havesuch a design upon me for:  however, since you say there is no timeto be lost, and that there is some villainous design on handagainst me, I will go on board this minute, and put to seaimmediately, if my men can stop the leak; but, sir," said I, "shallI go away ignorant of the cause of all this?  Can you give me nofurther light into it?"

　　"I can tell you but part of the story, sir," says he; "but I have aDutch seaman here with me, and I believe I could persuade him totell you the rest; but there is scarce time for it.  But the shortof the story is this - the first part of which I suppose you knowwell enough - that you were with this ship at Sumatra; that thereyour captain was murdered by the Malays, with three of his men; andthat you, or some of those that were on board with you, ran awaywith the ship, and are since turned pirates.  This is the sum ofthe story, and you will all be seized as pirates, I can assure you,and executed with very little ceremony; for you know merchant shipsshow but little law to pirates if they get them into their power."- "Now you speak plain English," said I, "and I thank you; andthough I know nothing that we have done like what you talk of, forI am sure we came honestly and fairly by the ship; yet seeing sucha work is doing, as you say, and that you seem to mean honestly, Iwill be upon my guard." - "Nay, sir," says he, "do not talk ofbeing upon your guard; the best defence is to be out of danger.  Ifyou have any regard for your life and the lives of all your men,put to sea without fail at high-water; and as you have a whole tidebefore you, you will be gone too far out before they can come down;for they will come away at high-water, and as they have twentymiles to come, you will get near two hours of them by thedifference of the tide, not reckoning the length of the way:besides, as they are only boats, and not ships, they will notventure to follow you far out to sea, especially if it blows." -"Well," said I, "you have been very kind in this:  what shall I doto make you amends?" - "Sir," says he, "you may not be willing tomake me any amends, because you may not be convinced of the truthof it.  I will make an offer to you:  I have nineteen months' paydue to me on board the ship -, which I came out of England in; andthe Dutchman that is with me has seven months' pay due to him.  Ifyou will make good our pay to us we will go along with you; if youfind nothing more in it we will desire no more; but if we doconvince you that we have saved your lives, and the ship, and thelives of all the men in her, we will leave the rest to you."

　　I consented to this readily, and went immediately on board, and thetwo men with me.  As soon as I came to the ship's side, my partner,who was on board, came out on the quarter-deck, and called to me,with a great deal of joy, "We have stopped the leak - we havestopped the leak!" - "Say you so?" said I; "thank God; but weighanchor, then, immediately." - "Weigh!" says he; "what do you meanby that?  What is the matter?" - "Ask no questions," said I; "butset all hands to work, and weigh without losing a minute."  He wassurprised; however, he called the captain, and he immediatelyordered the anchor to be got up; and though the tide was not quitedown, yet a little land-breeze blowing, we stood out to sea.  ThenI called him into the cabin, and told him the story; and we calledin the men, and they told us the rest of it; but as it took up agreat deal of time, before we had done a seaman comes to the cabindoor, and called out to us that the captain bade him tell us wewere chased by five sloops, or boats, full of men.  "Very well,"said I, "then it is apparent there is something in it."  I thenordered all our men to be called up, and told them there was adesign to seize the ship, and take us for pirates, and asked themif they would stand by us, and by one another; the men answeredcheerfully, one and all, that they would live and die with us.Then I asked the captain what way he thought best for us to managea fight with them; for resist them I was resolved we would, andthat to the last drop.  He said readily, that the way was to keepthem off with our great shot as long as we could, and then to useour small arms, to keep them from boarding us; but when neither ofthese would do any longer, we would retire to our close quarters,for perhaps they had not materials to break open our bulkheads, orget in upon us.

　　The gunner had in the meantime orders to bring two guns, to bearfore and aft, out of the steerage, to clear the deck, and load themwith musket-bullets, and small pieces of old iron, and what camenext to hand.  Thus we made ready for fight; but all this while wekept out to sea, with wind enough, and could see the boats at adistance, being five large longboats, following us with all thesail they could make.

　　Two of those boats (which by our glasses we could see were English)outsailed the rest, were near two leagues ahead of them, and gainedupon us considerably, so that we found they would come up with us;upon which we fired a gun without ball, to intimate that theyshould bring to:  and we put out a flag of truce, as a signal forparley:  but they came crowding after us till within shot, when wetook in our white flag, they having made no answer to it, and hungout a red flag, and fired at them with a shot.  Notwithstandingthis, they came on till they were near enough to call to them witha speaking-trumpet, bidding them keep off at their peril.

　　It was all one; they crowded after us, and endeavoured to comeunder our stern, so as to board us on our quarter; upon which,seeing they were resolute for mischief, and depended upon thestrength that followed them, I ordered to bring the ship to, sothat they lay upon our broadside; when immediately we fired fiveguns at them, one of which had been levelled so true as to carryaway the stern of the hindermost boat, and we then forced them totake down their sail, and to run all to the head of the boat, tokeep her from sinking; so she lay by, and had enough of it; butseeing the foremost boat crowd on after us, we made ready to fireat her in particular.  While this was doing one of the three boatsthat followed made up to the boat which we had disabled, to relieveher, and we could see her take out the men.  We then called againto the foremost boat, and offered a truce, to parley again, and toknow what her business was with us; but had no answer, only shecrowded close under our stern.  Upon this, our gunner who was avery dexterous fellow ran out his two case-guns, and fired again ather, but the shot missing, the men in the boat shouted, waved theircaps, and came on.  The gunner, getting quickly ready again, firedamong them a second time, one shot of which, though it missed theboat itself, yet fell in among the men, and we could easily see dida great deal of mischief among them.  We now wore the ship again,and brought our quarter to bear upon them, and firing three gunsmore, we found the boat was almost split to pieces; in particular,her rudder and a piece of her stern were shot quite away; so theyhanded her sail immediately, and were in great disorder.  Tocomplete their misfortune, our gunner let fly two guns at themagain; where he hit them we could not tell, but we found the boatwas sinking, and some of the men already in the water:  upon this,I immediately manned out our pinnace, with orders to pick up someof the men if they could, and save them from drowning, andimmediately come on board ship with them, because we saw the restof the boats began to come up.  Our men in the pinnace followedtheir orders, and took up three men, one of whom was just drowning,and it was a good while before we could recover him.  As soon asthey were on board we crowded all the sail we could make, and stoodfarther out to the sea; and we found that when the other boats cameup to the first, they gave over their chase.

　　Being thus delivered from a danger which, though I knew not thereason of it, yet seemed to be much greater than I apprehended, Iresolved that we should change our course, and not let any one knowwhither we were going; so we stood out to sea eastward, quite outof the course of all European ships, whether they were bound toChina or anywhere else, within the commerce of the Europeannations.  When we were at sea we began to consult with the twoseamen, and inquire what the meaning of all this should be; and theDutchman confirmed the gunner's story about the false sale of theship and of the murder of the captain, and also how that he, thisDutchman, and four more got into the woods, where they wanderedabout a great while, till at length he made his escape, and swamoff to a Dutch ship, which was sailing near the shore in its wayfrom China.

　　He then told us that he went to Batavia, where two of the seamenbelonging to the ship arrived, having deserted the rest in theirtravels, and gave an account that the fellow who had run away withthe ship, sold her at Bengal to a set of pirates, who were gone a-cruising in her, and that they had already taken an English shipand two Dutch ships very richly laden.  This latter part we foundto concern us directly, though we knew it to be false; yet, as mypartner said, very justly, if we had fallen into their hands, andthey had had such a prepossession against us beforehand, it hadbeen in vain for us to have defended ourselves, or to hope for anygood quarter at their hands; especially considering that ouraccusers had been our judges, and that we could have expectednothing from them but what rage would have dictated, and anungoverned passion have executed.  Therefore it was his opinion weshould go directly back to Bengal, from whence we came, withoutputting in at any port whatever - because where we could give agood account of ourselves, could prove where we were when the shipput in, of whom we bought her, and the like; and what was more thanall the rest, if we were put upon the necessity of bringing itbefore the proper judges, we should be sure to have some justice,and not to be hanged first and judged afterwards.

　　I was some time of my partner's opinion; but after a little moreserious thinking, I told him I thought it was a very great hazardfor us to attempt returning to Bengal, for that we were on thewrong side of the Straits of Malacca, and that if the alarm wasgiven, we should be sure to be waylaid on every side - that if weshould be taken, as it were, running away, we should even condemnourselves, and there would want no more evidence to destroy us.  Ialso asked the English sailor's opinion, who said he was of mymind, and that we certainly should be taken.  This danger a littlestartled my partner and all the ship's company, and we immediatelyresolved to go away to the coast of Tonquin, and so on to the coastof China - and pursuing the first design as to trade, find some wayor other to dispose of the ship, and come back in some of thevessels of the country such as we could get.  This was approved ofas the best method for our security, and accordingly we steeredaway NNE., keeping above fifty leagues off from the usual course tothe eastward.  This, however, put us to some inconvenience:  for,first, the winds, when we came that distance from the shore, seemedto be more steadily against us, blowing almost trade, as we callit, from the E. and ENE., so that we were a long while upon ourvoyage, and we were but ill provided with victuals for so long arun; and what was still worse, there was some danger that thoseEnglish and Dutch ships whose boats pursued us, whereof some werebound that way, might have got in before us, and if not, some othership bound to China might have information of us from them, andpursue us with the same vigour.

　　I must confess I was now very uneasy, and thought myself, includingthe late escape from the longboats, to have been in the mostdangerous condition that ever I was in through my past life; forwhatever ill circumstances I had been in, I was never pursued for athief before; nor had I ever done anything that merited the name ofdishonest or fraudulent, much less thievish.  I had chiefly been myown enemy, or, as I may rightly say, I had been nobody's enemy butmy own; but now I was woefully embarrassed:  for though I wasperfectly innocent, I was in no condition to make that innocenceappear; and if I had been taken, it had been under a supposed guiltof the worst kind.  This made me very anxious to make an escape,though which way to do it I knew not, or what port or place wecould go to.  My partner endeavoured to encourage me by describingthe several ports of that coast, and told me he would put in on thecoast of Cochin China, or the bay of Tonquin, intending afterwardsto go to Macao, where a great many European families resided, andparticularly the missionary priests, who usually went thither inorder to their going forward to China.

　　Hither then we resolved to go; and, accordingly, though after atedious course, and very much straitened for provisions, we camewithin sight of the coast very early in the morning; and uponreflection on the past circumstances of danger we were in, weresolved to put into a small river, which, however, had depthenough of water for us, and to see if we could, either overland orby the ship's pinnace, come to know what ships were in any portthereabouts.  This happy step was, indeed, our deliverance:  forthough we did not immediately see any European ships in the bay ofTonquin, yet the next morning there came into the bay two Dutchships; and a third without any colours spread out, but which webelieved to be a Dutchman, passed by at about two leagues'distance, steering for the coast of China; and in the afternoonwent by two English ships steering the same course; and thus wethought we saw ourselves beset with enemies both one way and theother.  The place we were in was wild and barbarous, the peoplethieves by occupation; and though it is true we had not much toseek of them, and, except getting a few provisions, cared not howlittle we had to do with them, yet it was with much difficulty thatwe kept ourselves from being insulted by them several ways.  Wewere in a small river of this country, within a few leagues of itsutmost limits northward; and by our boat we coasted north-east tothe point of land which opens the great bay of Tonquin; and it wasin this beating up along the shore that we discovered we weresurrounded with enemies.  The people we were among were the mostbarbarous of all the inhabitants of the coast; and among othercustoms they have this one:  that if any vessel has the misfortuneto be shipwrecked upon their coast, they make the men all prisonersor slaves; and it was not long before we found a spice of theirkindness this way, on the occasion following.

　　I have observed above that our ship sprung a leak at sea, and thatwe could not find it out; and it happened that, as I have said, itwas stopped unexpectedly, on the eve of our being pursued by theDutch and English ships in the bay of Siam; yet, as we did not findthe ship so perfectly tight and sound as we desired, we resolvedwhile we were at this place to lay her on shore, and clean herbottom, and, if possible, to find out where the leaks were.Accordingly, having lightened the ship, and brought all our gunsand other movables to one side, we tried to bring her down, that wemight come at her bottom; but, on second thoughts, we did not careto lay her on dry ground, neither could we find out a proper placefor it.

　　CHAPTER XII - THE CARPENTER'S WHIMSICAL CONTRIVANCE

　　THE inhabitants came wondering down the shore to look at us; andseeing the ship lie down on one side in such a manner, and heelingin towards the shore, and not seeing our men, who were at work onher bottom with stages, and with their boats on the off-side, theypresently concluded that the ship was cast away, and lay fast onthe ground.  On this supposition they came about us in two or threehours' time with ten or twelve large boats, having some of themeight, some ten men in a boat, intending, no doubt, to have come onboard and plundered the ship, and if they found us there, to havecarried us away for slaves.

　　When they came up to the ship, and began to row round her, theydiscovered us all hard at work on the outside of the ship's bottomand side, washing, and graving, and stopping, as every seafaringman knows how.  They stood for a while gazing at us, and we, whowere a little surprised, could not imagine what their design was;but being willing to be sure, we took this opportunity to get someof us into the ship, and others to hand down arms and ammunition tothose that were at work, to defend themselves with if there shouldbe occasion.  And it was no more than need:  for in less than aquarter of an hour's consultation, they agreed, it seems, that theship was really a wreck, and that we were all at work endeavouringto save her, or to save our lives by the help of our boats; andwhen we handed our arms into the boat, they concluded, by that act,that we were endeavouring to save some of our goods.  Upon this,they took it for granted we all belonged to them, and away theycame directly upon our men, as if it had been in a line-of-battle.

　　Our men, seeing so many of them, began to be frightened, for we laybut in an ill posture to fight, and cried out to us to know whatthey should do.  I immediately called to the men that worked uponthe stages to slip them down, and get up the side into the ship,and bade those in the boat to row round and come on board.  The fewwho were on board worked with all the strength and hands we had tobring the ship to rights; however, neither the men upon the stagesnor those in the boats could do as they were ordered before theCochin Chinese were upon them, when two of their boats boarded ourlongboat, and began to lay hold of the men as their prisoners.

　　The first man they laid hold of was an English seaman, a stout,strong fellow, who having a musket in his hand, never offered tofire it, but laid it down in the boat, like a fool, as I thought;but he understood his business better than I could teach him, forhe grappled the Pagan, and dragged him by main force out of theirboat into ours, where, taking him by the ears, he beat his head soagainst the boat's gunnel that the fellow died in his hands.  Inthe meantime, a Dutchman, who stood next, took up the musket, andwith the butt-end of it so laid about him, that he knocked downfive of them who attempted to enter the boat.  But this was doinglittle towards resisting thirty or forty men, who, fearless becauseignorant of their danger, began to throw themselves into thelongboat, where we had but five men in all to defend it; but thefollowing accident, which deserved our laughter, gave our men acomplete victory.

　　Our carpenter being prepared to grave the outside of the ship, aswell as to pay the seams where he had caulked her to stop theleaks, had got two kettles just let down into the boat, one filledwith boiling pitch, and the other with rosin, tallow, and oil, andsuch stuff as the shipwrights use for that work; and the man thatattended the carpenter had a great iron ladle in his hand, withwhich he supplied the men that were at work with the hot stuff.Two of the enemy's men entered the boat just where this fellowstood in the foresheets; he immediately saluted them with a ladlefull of the stuff, boiling hot which so burned and scalded them,being half-naked that they roared out like bulls, and, enraged withthe fire, leaped both into the sea.  The carpenter saw it, andcried out, "Well done, Jack! give them some more of it!" andstepping forward himself, takes one of the mops, and dipping it inthe pitch-pot, he and his man threw it among them so plentifullythat, in short, of all the men in the three boats, there was notone that escaped being scalded in a most frightful manner, and madesuch a howling and crying that I never heard a worse noise.

　　I was never better pleased with a victory in my life; not only asit was a perfect surprise to me, and that our danger was imminentbefore, but as we got this victory without any bloodshed, except ofthat man the seaman killed with his naked hands, and which I wasvery much concerned at.  Although it maybe a just thing, becausenecessary (for there is no necessary wickedness in nature), yet Ithought it was a sad sort of life, when we must be always obligedto be killing our fellow-creatures to preserve ourselves; and,indeed, I think so still; and I would even now suffer a great dealrather than I would take away the life even of the worst personinjuring me; and I believe all considering people, who know thevalue of life, would be of my opinion, if they entered seriouslyinto the consideration of it.

　　All the while this was doing, my partner and I, who managed therest of the men on board, had with great dexterity brought the shipalmost to rights, and having got the guns into their places again,the gunner called to me to bid our boat get out of the way, for hewould let fly among them.  I called back again to him, and bid himnot offer to fire, for the carpenter would do the work without him;but bid him heat another pitch-kettle, which our cook, who was onbroad, took care of.  However, the enemy was so terrified with whatthey had met with in their first attack, that they would not comeon again; and some of them who were farthest off, seeing the shipswim, as it were, upright, began, as we suppose, to see theirmistake, and gave over the enterprise, finding it was not as theyexpected.  Thus we got clear of this merry fight; and having gotsome rice and some roots and bread, with about sixteen hogs, onboard two days before, we resolved to stay here no longer, but goforward, whatever came of it; for we made no doubt but we should besurrounded the next day with rogues enough, perhaps more than ourpitch-kettle would dispose of for us.  We therefore got all ourthings on board the same evening, and the next morning were readyto sail:  in the meantime, lying at anchor at some distance fromthe shore, we were not so much concerned, being now in a fightingposture, as well as in a sailing posture, if any enemy hadpresented.  The next day, having finished our work within board,and finding our ship was perfectly healed of all her leaks, we setsail.  We would have gone into the bay of Tonquin, for we wanted toinform ourselves of what was to be known concerning the Dutch shipsthat had been there; but we durst not stand in there, because wehad seen several ships go in, as we supposed, but a little before;so we kept on NE. towards the island of Formosa, as much afraid ofbeing seen by a Dutch or English merchant ship as a Dutch orEnglish merchant ship in the Mediterranean is of an Algerine man-of-war.

　　When we were thus got to sea, we kept on NE., as if we would go tothe Manillas or the Philippine Islands; and this we did that wemight not fall into the way of any of the European ships; and thenwe steered north, till we came to the latitude of 22 degrees 30seconds, by which means we made the island of Formosa directly,where we came to an anchor, in order to get water and freshprovisions, which the people there, who are very courteous in theirmanners, supplied us with willingly, and dealt very fairly andpunctually with us in all their agreements and bargains.  This iswhat we did not find among other people, and may be owing to theremains of Christianity which was once planted here by a Dutchmissionary of Protestants, and it is a testimony of what I haveoften observed, viz. that the Christian religion always civilisesthe people, and reforms their manners, where it is received,whether it works saving effects upon them or no.

　　From thence we sailed still north, keeping the coast of China at anequal distance, till we knew we were beyond all the ports of Chinawhere our European ships usually come; being resolved, if possible,not to fall into any of their hands, especially in this country,where, as our circumstances were, we could not fail of beingentirely ruined.  Being now come to the latitude of 30 degrees, weresolved to put into the first trading port we should come at; andstanding in for the shore, a boat came of two leagues to us with anold Portuguese pilot on board, who, knowing us to be an Europeanship, came to offer his service, which, indeed, we were glad of andtook him on board; upon which, without asking us whither we wouldgo, he dismissed the boat he came in, and sent it back.  I thoughtit was now so much in our choice to make the old man carry uswhither we would, that I began to talk to him about carrying us tothe Gulf of Nankin, which is the most northern part of the coast ofChina.  The old man said he knew the Gulf of Nankin very well; butsmiling, asked us what we would do there?  I told him we would sellour cargo and purchase China wares, calicoes, raw silks, tea,wrought silks, &c.; and so we would return by the same course wecame.  He told us our best port would have been to put in at Macao,where we could not have failed of a market for our opium to oursatisfaction, and might for our money have purchased all sorts ofChina goods as cheap as we could at Nankin.

　　Not being able to put the old man out of his talk, of which he wasvery opinionated or conceited, I told him we were gentlemen as wellas merchants, and that we had a mind to go and see the great cityof Pekin, and the famous court of the monarch of China.  "Why,then," says the old man, "you should go to Ningpo, where, by theriver which runs into the sea there, you may go up within fiveleagues of the great canal.  This canal is a navigable stream,which goes through the heart of that vast empire of China, crossesall the rivers, passes some considerable hills by the help ofsluices and gates, and goes up to the city of Pekin, being inlength near two hundred and seventy leagues." - "Well," said I,"Seignior Portuguese, but that is not our business now; the greatquestion is, if you can carry us up to the city of Nankin, fromwhence we can travel to Pekin afterwards?"  He said he could do sovery well, and that there was a great Dutch ship gone up that wayjust before.  This gave me a little shock, for a Dutch ship was nowour terror, and we had much rather have met the devil, at least ifhe had not come in too frightful a figure; and we depended upon itthat a Dutch ship would be our destruction, for we were in nocondition to fight them; all the ships they trade with into thoseparts being of great burden, and of much greater force than wewere.

　　The old man found me a little confused, and under some concern whenhe named a Dutch ship, and said to me, "Sir, you need be under noapprehensions of the Dutch; I suppose they are not now at war withyour nation?" - "No," said I, "that's true; but I know not whatliberties men may take when they are out of the reach of the lawsof their own country." - "Why," says he, "you are no pirates; whatneed you fear?  They will not meddle with peaceable merchants,sure."  These words put me into the greatest disorder and confusionimaginable; nor was it possible for me to conceal it so, but theold man easily perceived it.

　　"Sir," says he, "I find you are in some disorder in your thoughtsat my talk:  pray be pleased to go which way you think fit, anddepend upon it, I'll do you all the service I can."  Upon this wefell into further discourse, in which, to my alarm and amazement,he spoke of the villainous doings of a certain pirate ship that hadlong been the talk of mariners in those seas; no other, in a word,than the very ship he was now on board of, and which we had sounluckily purchased.  I presently saw there was no help for it butto tell him the plain truth, and explain all the danger and troublewe had suffered through this misadventure, and, in particular, ourearnest wish to be speedily quit of the ship altogether; for whichreason we had resolved to carry her up to Nankin.

　　The old man was amazed at this relation, and told us we were in theright to go away to the north; and that, if he might advise us, itshould be to sell the ship in China, which we might well do, andbuy, or build another in the country; adding that I should meetwith customers enough for the ship at Nankin, that a Chinese junkwould serve me very well to go back again, and that he wouldprocure me people both to buy one and sell the other.  "Well, but,seignior," said I, "as you say they know the ship so well, I may,perhaps, if I follow your measures, be instrumental to bring somehonest, innocent men into a terrible broil; for wherever they findthe ship they will prove the guilt upon the men, by proving thiswas the ship." - "Why," says the old man, "I'll find out a way toprevent that; for as I know all those commanders you speak of verywell, and shall see them all as they pass by, I will be sure to setthem to rights in the thing, and let them know that they had beenso much in the wrong; that though the people who were on board atfirst might run away with the ship, yet it was not true that theyhad turned pirates; and that, in particular, these were not the menthat first went off with the ship, but innocently bought her fortheir trade; and I am persuaded they will so far believe me as atleast to act more cautiously for the time to come."

　　In about thirteen days' sail we came to an anchor, at the south-west point of the great Gulf of Nankin; where I learned by accidentthat two Dutch ships were gone the length before me, and that Ishould certainly fall into their hands.  I consulted my partneragain in this exigency, and he was as much at a loss as I was.  Ithen asked the old pilot if there was no creek or harbour which Imight put into and pursue my business with the Chinese privately,and be in no danger of the enemy.  He told me if I would sail tothe southward about forty-two leagues, there was a little portcalled Quinchang, where the fathers of the mission usually landedfrom Macao, on their progress to teach the Christian religion tothe Chinese, and where no European ships ever put in; and if Ithought to put in there, I might consider what further course totake when I was on shore.  He confessed, he said, it was not aplace for merchants, except that at some certain times they had akind of a fair there, when the merchants from Japan came overthither to buy Chinese merchandises.  The name of the port I mayperhaps spell wrong, having lost this, together with the names ofmany other places set down in a little pocket-book, which wasspoiled by the water by an accident; but this I remember, that theChinese merchants we corresponded with called it by a differentname from that which our Portuguese pilot gave it, who pronouncedit Quinchang.  As we were unanimous in our resolution to go to thisplace, we weighed the next day, having only gone twice on shorewhere we were, to get fresh water; on both which occasions thepeople of the country were very civil, and brought abundance ofprovisions to sell to us; but nothing without money.

　　We did not come to the other port (the wind being contrary) forfive days; but it was very much to our satisfaction, and I wasthankful when I set my foot on shore, resolving, and my partnertoo, that if it was possible to dispose of ourselves and effectsany other way, though not profitably, we would never more set footon board that unhappy vessel.  Indeed, I must acknowledge, that ofall the circumstances of life that ever I had any experience of,nothing makes mankind so completely miserable as that of being inconstant fear.  Well does the Scripture say, "The fear of manbrings a snare"; it is a life of death, and the mind is so entirelyoppressed by it, that it is capable of no relief.

　　Nor did it fail of its usual operations upon the fancy, byheightening every danger; representing the English and Dutchcaptains to be men incapable of hearing reason, or ofdistinguishing between honest men and rogues; or between a storycalculated for our own turn, made out of nothing, on purpose todeceive, and a true, genuine account of our whole voyage, progress,and design; for we might many ways have convinced any reasonablecreatures that we were not pirates; the goods we had on board, thecourse we steered, our frankly showing ourselves, and entering intosuch and such ports; and even our very manner, the force we had,the number of men, the few arms, the little ammunition, shortprovisions; all these would have served to convince any men that wewere no pirates.  The opium and other goods we had on board wouldmake it appear the ship had been at Bengal.  The Dutchmen, who, itwas said, had the names of all the men that were in the ship, mighteasily see that we were a mixture of English, Portuguese, andIndians, and but two Dutchmen on board.  These, and many otherparticular circumstances, might have made it evident to theunderstanding of any commander, whose hands we might fall into,that we were no pirates.

　　But fear, that blind, useless passion, worked another way, andthrew us into the vapours; it bewildered our understandings, andset the imagination at work to form a thousand terrible things thatperhaps might never happen.  We first supposed, as indeed everybodyhad related to us, that the seamen on board the English and Dutchships, but especially the Dutch, were so enraged at the name of apirate, and especially at our beating off their boats and escaping,that they would not give themselves leave to inquire whether wewere pirates or no, but would execute us off-hand, without givingus any room for a defence.  We reflected that there really was somuch apparent evidence before them, that they would scarce inquireafter any more; as, first, that the ship was certainly the same,and that some of the seamen among them knew her, and had been onboard her; and, secondly, that when we had intelligence at theriver of Cambodia that they were coming down to examine us, wefought their boats and fled.  Therefore we made no doubt but theywere as fully satisfied of our being pirates as we were satisfiedof the contrary; and, as I often said, I know not but I should havebeen apt to have taken those circumstances for evidence, if thetables were turned, and my case was theirs; and have made noscruple of cutting all the crew to pieces, without believing, orperhaps considering, what they might have to offer in theirdefence.

　　But let that be how it will, these were our apprehensions; and bothmy partner and I scarce slept a night without dreaming of haltersand yard-arms; of fighting, and being taken; of killing, and beingkilled:  and one night I was in such a fury in my dream, fancyingthe Dutchmen had boarded us, and I was knocking one of their seamendown, that I struck my doubled fist against the side of the cabin Ilay in with such a force as wounded my hand grievously, broke myknuckles, and cut and bruised the flesh, so that it awaked me outof my sleep.  Another apprehension I had was, the cruel usage wemight meet with from them if we fell into their hands; then thestory of Amboyna came into my head, and how the Dutch might perhapstorture us, as they did our countrymen there, and make some of ourmen, by extremity of torture, confess to crimes they never wereguilty of, or own themselves and all of us to be pirates, and sothey would put us to death with a formal appearance of justice; andthat they might be tempted to do this for the gain of our ship andcargo, worth altogether four or five thousand pounds.  We did notconsider that the captains of ships have no authority to act thus;and if we had surrendered prisoners to them, they could not answerthe destroying us, or torturing us, but would be accountable for itwhen they came to their country.  However, if they were to act thuswith us, what advantage would it be to us that they should becalled to an account for it? - or if we were first to be murdered,what satisfaction would it be to us to have them punished when theycame home?

　　I cannot refrain taking notice here what reflections I now had uponthe vast variety of my particular circumstances; how hard I thoughtit that I, who had spent forty years in a life of continualdifficulties, and was at last come, as it were, to the port orhaven which all men drive at, viz. to have rest and plenty, shouldbe a volunteer in new sorrows by my own unhappy choice, and that I,who had escaped so many dangers in my youth, should now come to behanged in my old age, and in so remote a place, for a crime which Iwas not in the least inclined to, much less guilty of.  After thesethoughts something of religion would come in; and I would beconsidering that this seemed to me to be a disposition of immediateProvidence, and I ought to look upon it and submit to it as such.For, although I was innocent as to men, I was far from beinginnocent as to my Maker; and I ought to look in and examine whatother crimes in my life were most obvious to me, and for whichProvidence might justly inflict this punishment as a retribution;and thus I ought to submit to this, just as I would to a shipwreck,if it had pleased God to have brought such a disaster upon me.

　　In its turn natural courage would sometimes take its place, andthen I would be talking myself up to vigorous resolutions; that Iwould not be taken to be barbarously used by a parcel of mercilesswretches in cold blood; that it were much better to have falleninto the hands of the savages, though I were sure they would feastupon me when they had taken me, than those who would perhaps gluttheir rage upon me by inhuman tortures and barbarities; that in thecase of the savages, I always resolved to die fighting to the lastgasp, and why should I not do so now?  Whenever these thoughtsprevailed, I was sure to put myself into a kind of fever with theagitation of a supposed fight; my blood would boil, and my eyessparkle, as if I was engaged, and I always resolved to take noquarter at their hands; but even at last, if I could resist nolonger, I would blow up the ship and all that was in her, and leavethem but little booty to boast of.

　　CHAPTER XIII - ARRIVAL IN CHINA

　　THE greater weight the anxieties and perplexities of these thingswere to our thoughts while we were at sea, the greater was oursatisfaction when we saw ourselves on shore; and my partner told mehe dreamed that he had a very heavy load upon his back, which hewas to carry up a hill, and found that he was not able to standlonger under it; but that the Portuguese pilot came and took it offhis back, and the hill disappeared, the ground before him appearingall smooth and plain:  and truly it was so; they were all like menwho had a load taken off their backs.  For my part I had a weighttaken off from my heart that it was not able any longer to bear;and as I said above we resolved to go no more to sea in that ship.When we came on shore, the old pilot, who was now our friend, gotus a lodging, together with a warehouse for our goods; it was alittle hut, with a larger house adjoining to it, built and alsopalisadoed round with canes, to keep out pilferers, of which therewere not a few in that country:  however, the magistrates allowedus a little guard, and we had a soldier with a kind of half-pike,who stood sentinel at our door, to whom we allowed a pint of riceand a piece of money about the value of three-pence per day, sothat our goods were kept very safe.

　　The fair or mart usually kept at this place had been over sometime; however, we found that there were three or four junks in theriver, and two ships from Japan, with goods which they had boughtin China, and were not gone away, having some Japanese merchants onshore.

　　The first thing our old Portuguese pilot did for us was to get usacquainted with three missionary Romish priests who were in thetown, and who had been there some time converting the people toChristianity; but we thought they made but poor work of it, andmade them but sorry Christians when they had done.  One of thesewas a Frenchman, whom they called Father Simon; another was aPortuguese; and a third a Genoese.  Father Simon was courteous, andvery agreeable company; but the other two were more reserved,seemed rigid and austere, and applied seriously to the work theycame about, viz. to talk with and insinuate themselves among theinhabitants wherever they had opportunity.  We often ate and drankwith those men; and though I must confess the conversion, as theycall it, of the Chinese to Christianity is so far from the trueconversion required to bring heathen people to the faith of Christ,that it seems to amount to little more than letting them know thename of Christ, and say some prayers to the Virgin Mary and herSon, in a tongue which they understood not, and to crossthemselves, and the like; yet it must be confessed that thereligionists, whom we call missionaries, have a firm belief thatthese people will be saved, and that they are the instruments ofit; and on this account they undergo not only the fatigue of thevoyage, and the hazards of living in such places, but oftentimesdeath itself, and the most violent tortures, for the sake of thiswork.

　　Father Simon was appointed, it seems, by order of the chief of themission, to go up to Pekin, and waited only for another priest, whowas ordered to come to him from Macao, to go along with him.  Wescarce ever met together but he was inviting me to go that journey;telling me how he would show me all the glorious things of thatmighty empire, and, among the rest, Pekin, the greatest city in theworld:  "A city," said he, "that your London and our Paris puttogether cannot be equal to."  But as I looked on those things withdifferent eyes from other men, so I shall give my opinion of themin a few words, when I come in the course of my travels to speakmore particularly of them.

　　Dining with Father Simon one day, and being very merry together, Ishowed some little inclination to go with him; and he pressed meand my partner very hard to consent.  "Why, father," says mypartner, "should you desire our company so much? you know we areheretics, and you do not love us, nor cannot keep us company withany pleasure." - "Oh," says he, "you may perhaps be good Catholicsin time; my business here is to convert heathens, and who knows butI may convert you too?" - "Very well, father," said I, "so you willpreach to us all the way?" - "I will not be troublesome to you,"says he; "our religion does not divest us of good manners; besides,we are here like countrymen; and so we are, compared to the placewe are in; and if you are Huguenots, and I a Catholic, we may allbe Christians at last; at least, we are all gentlemen, and we mayconverse so, without being uneasy to one another."  I liked thispart of his discourse very well, and it began to put me in mind ofmy priest that I had left in the Brazils; but Father Simon did notcome up to his character by a great deal; for though this friar hadno appearance of a criminal levity in him, yet he had not that fundof Christian zeal, strict piety, and sincere affection to religionthat my other good ecclesiastic had.

　　But to leave him a little, though he never left us, nor solicitedus to go with him; we had something else before us at first, for wehad all this while our ship and our merchandise to dispose of, andwe began to be very doubtful what we should do, for we were now ina place of very little business.  Once I was about to venture tosail for the river of Kilam, and the city of Nankin; but Providenceseemed now more visibly, as I thought, than ever to concern itselfin our affairs; and I was encouraged, from this very time, to thinkI should, one way or other, get out of this entangled circumstance,and be brought home to my own country again, though I had not theleast view of the manner.  Providence, I say, began here to clearup our way a little; and the first thing that offered was, that ourold Portuguese pilot brought a Japan merchant to us, who inquiredwhat goods we had:  and, in the first place, he bought all ouropium, and gave us a very good price for it, paying us in gold byweight, some in small pieces of their own coin, and some in smallwedges, of about ten or twelves ounces each.  While we were dealingwith him for our opium, it came into my head that he might perhapsdeal for the ship too, and I ordered the interpreter to propose itto him.  He shrunk up his shoulders at it when it was firstproposed to him; but in a few days after he came to me, with one ofthe missionary priests for his interpreter, and told me he had aproposal to make to me, which was this:  he had bought a greatquantity of our goods, when he had no thoughts of proposals made tohim of buying the ship; and that, therefore, he had not money topay for the ship:  but if I would let the same men who were in theship navigate her, he would hire the ship to go to Japan; and wouldsend them from thence to the Philippine Islands with anotherloading, which he would pay the freight of before they went fromJapan:  and that at their return he would buy the ship.  I began tolisten to his proposal, and so eager did my head still run uponrambling, that I could not but begin to entertain a notion of goingmyself with him, and so to set sail from the Philippine Islandsaway to the South Seas; accordingly, I asked the Japanese merchantif he would not hire us to the Philippine Islands and discharge usthere.  He said No, he could not do that, for then he could nothave the return of his cargo; but he would discharge us in Japan,at the ship's return.  Well, still I was for taking him at thatproposal, and going myself; but my partner, wiser than myself,persuaded me from it, representing the dangers, as well of the seasas of the Japanese, who are a false, cruel, and treacherous people;likewise those of the Spaniards at the Philippines, more false,cruel, and treacherous than they.

　　But to bring this long turn of our affairs to a conclusion; thefirst thing we had to do was to consult with the captain of theship, and with his men, and know if they were willing to go toJapan.  While I was doing this, the young man whom my nephew hadleft with me as my companion came up, and told me that he thoughtthat voyage promised very fair, and that there was a great prospectof advantage, and he would be very glad if I undertook it; but thatif I would not, and would give him leave, he would go as amerchant, or as I pleased to order him; that if ever he came toEngland, and I was there and alive, he would render me a faithfulaccount of his success, which should be as much mine as I pleased.I was loath to part with him; but considering the prospect ofadvantage, which really was considerable, and that he was a youngfellow likely to do well in it, I inclined to let him go; but Itold him I would consult my partner, and give him an answer thenext day.  I discoursed about it with my partner, who thereuponmade a most generous offer:  "You know it has been an unluckyship," said he, "and we both resolve not to go to sea in it again;if your steward" (so he called my man) "will venture the voyage, Iwill leave my share of the vessel to him, and let him make the bestof it; and if we live to meet in England, and he meets with successabroad, he shall account for one half of the profits of the ship'sfreight to us; the other shall be his own."

　　If my partner, who was no way concerned with my young man, made himsuch an offer, I could not do less than offer him the same; and allthe ship's company being willing to go with him, we made over halfthe ship to him in property, and took a writing from him, obliginghim to account for the other, and away he went to Japan.  The Japanmerchant proved a very punctual, honest man to him:  protected himat Japan, and got him a licence to come on shore, which theEuropeans in general have not lately obtained.  He paid him hisfreight very punctually; sent him to the Philippines loaded withJapan and China wares, and a supercargo of their own, who,trafficking with the Spaniards, brought back European goods again,and a great quantity of spices; and there he was not only paid hisfreight very well, and at a very good price, but not being willingto sell the ship, then the merchant furnished him goods on his ownaccount; and with some money, and some spices of his own which hebrought with him, he went back to the Manillas, where he sold hiscargo very well.  Here, having made a good acquaintance at Manilla,he got his ship made a free ship, and the governor of Manilla hiredhim to go to Acapulco, on the coast of America, and gave him alicence to land there, and to travel to Mexico, and to pass in anySpanish ship to Europe with all his men.  He made the voyage toAcapulco very happily, and there he sold his ship:  and havingthere also obtained allowance to travel by land to Porto Bello, hefound means to get to Jamaica, with all his treasure, and abouteight years after came to England exceeding rich.

　　But to return to our particular affairs, being now to part with theship and ship's company, it came before us, of course, to considerwhat recompense we should give to the two men that gave us suchtimely notice of the design against us in the river Cambodia.  Thetruth was, they had done us a very considerable service, anddeserved well at our hands; though, by the way, they were a coupleof rogues, too; for, as they believed the story of our beingpirates, and that we had really run away with the ship, they camedown to us, not only to betray the design that was formed againstus, but to go to sea with us as pirates.  One of them confessedafterwards that nothing else but the hopes of going a-roguingbrought him to do it:  however, the service they did us was not theless, and therefore, as I had promised to be grateful to them, Ifirst ordered the money to be paid them which they said was due tothem on board their respective ships:  over and above that, I gaveeach of them a small sum of money in gold, which contented themvery well.  I then made the Englishman gunner in the ship, thegunner being now made second mate and purser; the Dutchman I madeboatswain; so they were both very well pleased, and proved veryserviceable, being both able seamen, and very stout fellows.

　　We were now on shore in China; if I thought myself banished, andremote from my own country at Bengal, where I had many ways to gethome for my money, what could I think of myself now, when I wasabout a thousand leagues farther off from home, and destitute ofall manner of prospect of return?  All we had for it was this:that in about four months' time there was to be another fair at theplace where we were, and then we might be able to purchase variousmanufactures of the country, and withal might possibly find someChinese junks from Tonquin for sail, that would carry us and ourgoods whither we pleased.  This I liked very well, and resolved towait; besides, as our particular persons were not obnoxious, so ifany English or Dutch ships came thither, perhaps we might have anopportunity to load our goods, and get passage to some other placein India nearer home.  Upon these hopes we resolved to continuehere; but, to divert ourselves, we took two or three journeys intothe country.

　　First, we went ten days' journey to Nankin, a city well worthseeing; they say it has a million of people in it:  it is regularlybuilt, and the streets are all straight, and cross one another indirect lines.  But when I come to compare the miserable people ofthese countries with ours, their fabrics, their manner of living,their government, their religion, their wealth, and their glory, assome call it, I must confess that I scarcely think it worth mywhile to mention them here.  We wonder at the grandeur, the riches,the pomp, the ceremonies, the government, the manufactures, thecommerce, and conduct of these people; not that there is really anymatter for wonder, but because, having a true notion of thebarbarity of those countries, the rudeness and the ignorance thatprevail there, we do not expect to find any such thing so far off.Otherwise, what are their buildings to the palaces and royalbuildings of Europe?  What their trade to the universal commerce ofEngland, Holland, France, and Spain?  What are their cities toours, for wealth, strength, gaiety of apparel, rich furniture, andinfinite variety?  What are their ports, supplied with a few junksand barks, to our navigation, our merchant fleets, our large andpowerful navies?  Our city of London has more trade than half theirmighty empire:  one English, Dutch, or French man-of-war of eightyguns would be able to fight almost all the shipping belonging toChina:  but the greatness of their wealth, their trade, the powerof their government, and the strength of their armies, may be alittle surprising to us, because, as I have said, considering themas a barbarous nation of pagans, little better than savages, we didnot expect such things among them.  But all the forces of theirempire, though they were to bring two millions of men into thefield together, would be able to do nothing but ruin the countryand starve themselves; a million of their foot could not standbefore one embattled body of our infantry, posted so as not to besurrounded, though they were not to be one to twenty in number;nay, I do not boast if I say that thirty thousand German or Englishfoot, and ten thousand horse, well managed, could defeat all theforces of China.  Nor is there a fortified town in China that couldhold out one month against the batteries and attacks of an Europeanarmy.  They have firearms, it is true, but they are awkward anduncertain in their going off; and their powder has but littlestrength.  Their armies are badly disciplined, and want skill toattack, or temper to retreat; and therefore, I must confess, itseemed strange to me, when I came home, and heard our people saysuch fine things of the power, glory, magnificence, and trade ofthe Chinese; because, as far as I saw, they appeared to be acontemptible herd or crowd of ignorant, sordid slaves, subjected toa government qualified only to rule such a people; and were not itsdistance inconceivably, great from Muscovy, and that empire in amanner as rude, impotent, and ill governed as they, the Czar ofMuscovy might with ease drive them all out of their country, andconquer them in one campaign; and had the Czar (who is now agrowing prince) fallen this way, instead of attacking the warlikeSwedes, and equally improved himself in the art of war, as they sayhe has done; and if none of the powers of Europe had envied orinterrupted him, he might by this time have been Emperor of China,instead of being beaten by the King of Sweden at Narva, when thelatter was not one to six in number.

　　As their strength and their grandeur, so their navigation,commerce, and husbandry are very imperfect, compared to the samethings in Europe; also, in their knowledge, their learning, and intheir skill in the sciences, they are either very awkward ordefective, though they have globes or spheres, and a smattering ofthe mathematics, and think they know more than all the worldbesides.  But they know little of the motions of the heavenlybodies; and so grossly and absurdly ignorant are their commonpeople, that when the sun is eclipsed, they think a great dragonhas assaulted it, and is going to run away with it; and they fall aclattering with all the drums and kettles in the country, to frightthe monster away, just as we do to hive a swarm of bees!

　　As this is the only excursion of the kind which I have made in allthe accounts I have given of my travels, so I shall make no moresuch.  It is none of my business, nor any part of my design; but togive an account of my own adventures through a life of inimitablewanderings, and a long variety of changes, which, perhaps, few thatcome after me will have heard the like of:  I shall, therefore, sayvery little of all the mighty places, desert countries, andnumerous people I have yet to pass through, more than relates to myown story, and which my concern among them will make necessary.

　　I was now, as near as I can compute, in the heart of China, aboutthirty degrees north of the line, for we were returned from Nankin.I had indeed a mind to see the city of Pekin, which I had heard somuch of, and Father Simon importuned me daily to do it.  At lengthhis time of going away being set, and the other missionary who wasto go with him being arrived from Macao, it was necessary that weshould resolve either to go or not; so I referred it to my partner,and left it wholly to his choice, who at length resolved it in theaffirmative, and we prepared for our journey.  We set out with verygood advantage as to finding the way; for we got leave to travel inthe retinue of one of their mandarins, a kind of viceroy orprincipal magistrate in the province where they reside, and whotake great state upon them, travelling with great attendance, andgreat homage from the people, who are sometimes greatlyimpoverished by them, being obliged to furnish provisions for themand all their attendants in their journeys.  I particularlyobserved in our travelling with his baggage, that though wereceived sufficient provisions both for ourselves and our horsesfrom the country, as belonging to the mandarin, yet we were obligedto pay for everything we had, after the market price of thecountry, and the mandarin's steward collected it duly from us.Thus our travelling in the retinue of the mandarin, though it was agreat act of kindness, was not such a mighty favour to us, but wasa great advantage to him, considering there were above thirty otherpeople travelled in the same manner besides us, under theprotection of his retinue; for the country furnished all theprovisions for nothing to him, and yet he took our money for them.

　　We were twenty-five days travelling to Pekin, through a countryexceeding populous, but I think badly cultivated; the husbandry,the economy, and the way of living miserable, though they boast somuch of the industry of the people:  I say miserable, if comparedwith our own, but not so to these poor wretches, who know no other.The pride of the poor people is infinitely great, and exceeded bynothing but their poverty, in some parts, which adds to that whichI call their misery; and I must needs think the savages of Americalive much more happy than the poorer sort of these, because as theyhave nothing, so they desire nothing; whereas these are proud andinsolent and in the main are in many parts mere beggars anddrudges.  Their ostentation is inexpressible; and, if they can,they love to keep multitudes of servants or slaves, which is to thelast degree ridiculous, as well as their contempt of all the worldbut themselves.

　　I must confess I travelled more pleasantly afterwards in thedeserts and vast wildernesses of Grand Tartary than here, and yetthe roads here are well paved and well kept, and very convenientfor travellers; but nothing was more awkward to me than to see sucha haughty, imperious, insolent people, in the midst of the grossestsimplicity and ignorance; and my friend Father Simon and I used tobe very merry upon these occasions, to see their beggarly pride.For example, coming by the house of a country gentleman, as FatherSimon called him, about ten leagues off the city of Nankin, we hadfirst of all the honour to ride with the master of the house abouttwo miles; the state he rode in was a perfect Don Quixotism, beinga mixture of pomp and poverty.  His habit was very proper for amerry-andrew, being a dirty calico, with hanging sleeves, tassels,and cuts and slashes almost on every side:  it covered a taffetyvest, so greasy as to testify that his honour must be a mostexquisite sloven.  His horse was a poor, starved, hobblingcreature, and two slaves followed him on foot to drive the poorcreature along; he had a whip in his hand, and he belaboured thebeast as fast about the head as his slaves did about the tail; andthus he rode by us, with about ten or twelve servants, going fromthe city to his country seat, about half a league before us.  Wetravelled on gently, but this figure of a gentleman rode awaybefore us; and as we stopped at a village about an hour to refreshus, when we came by the country seat of this great man, we saw himin a little place before his door, eating a repast.  It was a kindof garden, but he was easy to be seen; and we were given tounderstand that the more we looked at him the better he would bepleased.  He sat under a tree, something like the palmetto, whicheffectually shaded him over the head, and on the south side; butunder the tree was placed a large umbrella, which made that partlook well enough.  He sat lolling back in a great elbow-chair,being a heavy corpulent man, and had his meat brought him by twowomen slaves.  He had two more, one of whom fed the squire with aspoon, and the other held the dish with one hand, and scraped offwhat he let fall upon his worship's beard and taffety vest.

　　Leaving the poor wretch to please himself with our looking at him,as if we admired his idle pomp, we pursued our journey.  FatherSimon had the curiosity to stay to inform himself what dainties thecountry justice had to feed on in all his state, which he had thehonour to taste of, and which was, I think, a mess of boiled rice,with a great piece of garlic in it, and a little bag filled withgreen pepper, and another plant which they have there, somethinglike our ginger, but smelling like musk, and tasting like mustard;all this was put together, and a small piece of lean mutton boiledin it, and this was his worship's repast.  Four or five servantsmore attended at a distance, who we supposed were to eat of thesame after their master.  As for our mandarin with whom wetravelled, he was respected as a king, surrounded always with hisgentlemen, and attended in all his appearances with such pomp, thatI saw little of him but at a distance.  I observed that there wasnot a horse in his retinue but that our carrier's packhorses inEngland seemed to me to look much better; though it was hard tojudge rightly, for they were so covered with equipage, mantles,trappings, &c., that we could scarce see anything but their feetand their heads as they went along.

　　I was now light-hearted, and all my late trouble and perplexitybeing over, I had no anxious thoughts about me, which made thisjourney the pleasanter to me; in which no ill accident attended me,only in passing or fording a small river, my horse fell and made mefree of the country, as they call it - that is to say, threw me in.The place was not deep, but it wetted me all over.  I mention itbecause it spoiled my pocket-book, wherein I had set down the namesof several people and places which I had occasion to remember, andwhich not taking due care of, the leaves rotted, and the words werenever after to be read.

　　At length we arrived at Pekin.  I had nobody with me but the youthwhom my nephew had given me to attend me as a servant and whoproved very trusty and diligent; and my partner had nobody with himbut one servant, who was a kinsman.  As for the Portuguese pilot,he being desirous to see the court, we bore his charges for hiscompany, and for our use of him as an interpreter, for heunderstood the language of the country, and spoke good French and alittle English.  Indeed, this old man was most useful to useverywhere; for we had not been above a week at Pekin, when he camelaughing.  "Ah, Seignior Inglese," says he, "I have something totell will make your heart glad." - "My heart glad," says I; "whatcan that be?  I don't know anything in this country can either giveme joy or grief to any great degree." - "Yes, yes," said the oldman, in broken English, "make you glad, me sorry." - "Why," said I,"will it make you sorry?" - "Because," said he, "you have broughtme here twenty-five days' journey, and will leave me to go backalone; and which way shall I get to my port afterwards, without aship, without a horse, without PECUNE?" so he called money, beinghis broken Latin, of which he had abundance to make us merry with.In short, he told us there was a great caravan of Muscovite andPolish merchants in the city, preparing to set out on their journeyby land to Muscovy, within four or five weeks; and he was sure wewould take the opportunity to go with them, and leave him behind,to go back alone.

　　I confess I was greatly surprised with this good news, and hadscarce power to speak to him for some time; but at last I said tohim, "How do you know this? are you sure it is true?" - "Yes," sayshe; "I met this morning in the street an old acquaintance of mine,an Armenian, who is among them.  He came last from Astrakhan, andwas designed to go to Tonquin, where I formerly knew him, but hasaltered his mind, and is now resolved to go with the caravan toMoscow, and so down the river Volga to Astrakhan." - "Well,Seignior," says I, "do not be uneasy about being left to go backalone; if this be a method for my return to England, it shall beyour fault if you go back to Macao at all."  We then went toconsult together what was to be done; and I asked my partner whathe thought of the pilot's news, and whether it would suit with hisaffairs?  He told me he would do just as I would; for he hadsettled all his affairs so well at Bengal, and left his effects insuch good hands, that as we had made a good voyage, if he couldinvest it in China silks, wrought and raw, he would be content togo to England, and then make a voyage back to Bengal by theCompany's ships.

　　Having resolved upon this, we agreed that if our Portuguese pilotwould go with us, we would bear his charges to Moscow, or toEngland, if he pleased; nor, indeed, were we to be esteemed over-generous in that either, if we had not rewarded him further, theservice he had done us being really worth more than that; for hehad not only been a pilot to us at sea, but he had been like abroker for us on shore; and his procuring for us a Japan merchantwas some hundreds of pounds in our pockets.  So, being willing togratify him, which was but doing him justice, and very willing alsoto have him with us besides, for he was a most necessary man on alloccasions, we agreed to give him a quantity of coined gold, which,as I computed it, was worth one hundred and seventy-five poundssterling, between us, and to bear all his charges, both for himselfand horse, except only a horse to carry his goods.  Having settledthis between ourselves, we called him to let him know what we hadresolved.  I told him he had complained of our being willing to lethim go back alone, and I was now about to tell him we designed heshould not go back at all.  That as we had resolved to go to Europewith the caravan, we were very willing he should go with us; andthat we called him to know his mind.  He shook his head and said itwas a long journey, and that he had no PECUNE to carry him thither,or to subsist himself when he came there.  We told him we believedit was so, and therefore we had resolved to do something for himthat should let him see how sensible we were of the service he haddone us, and also how agreeable he was to us:  and then I told himwhat we had resolved to give him here, which he might lay out as wewould do our own; and that as for his charges, if he would go withus we would set him safe on shore (life and casualties excepted),either in Muscovy or England, as he would choose, at our owncharge, except only the carriage of his goods.  He received theproposal like a man transported, and told us he would go with usover all the whole world; and so we all prepared for our journey.However, as it was with us, so it was with the other merchants:they had many things to do, and instead of being ready in fiveweeks, it was four months and some days before all things were gottogether.

　　CHAPTER XIV - ATTACKED BY TARTARS

　　IT was the beginning of February, new style, when we set out fromPekin.  My partner and the old pilot had gone express back to theport where we had first put in, to dispose of some goods which wehad left there; and I, with a Chinese merchant whom I had someknowledge of at Nankin, and who came to Pekin on his own affairs,went to Nankin, where I bought ninety pieces of fine damasks, withabout two hundred pieces of other very fine silk of several sorts,some mixed with gold, and had all these brought to Pekin against mypartner's return.  Besides this, we bought a large quantity of rawsilk, and some other goods, our cargo amounting, in these goodsonly, to about three thousand five hundred pounds sterling; which,together with tea and some fine calicoes, and three camels' loadsof nutmegs and cloves, loaded in all eighteen camels for our share,besides those we rode upon; these, with two or three spare horses,and two horses loaded with provisions, made together twenty-sixcamels and horses in our retinue.

　　The company was very great, and, as near as I can remember, madebetween three and four hundred horses, and upwards of one hundredand twenty men, very well armed and provided for all events; for asthe Eastern caravans are subject to be attacked by the Arabs, soare these by the Tartars.  The company consisted of people ofseveral nations, but there were above sixty of them merchants orinhabitants of Moscow, though of them some were Livonians; and toour particular satisfaction, five of them were Scots, who appearedalso to be men of great experience in business, and of very goodsubstance.

　　When we had travelled one day's journey, the guides, who were fivein number, called all the passengers, except the servants, to agreat council, as they called it.  At this council every onedeposited a certain quantity of money to a common stock, for thenecessary expense of buying forage on the way, where it was nototherwise to be had, and for satisfying the guides, getting horses,and the like.  Here, too, they constituted the journey, as theycall it, viz. they named captains and officers to draw us all up,and give the word of command, in case of an attack, and give everyone their turn of command; nor was this forming us into order anymore than what we afterwards found needful on the way.

　　The road all on this side of the country is very populous, and isfull of potters and earth-makers - that is to say, people, thattemper the earth for the China ware.  As I was coming along, ourPortuguese pilot, who had always something or other to say to makeus merry, told me he would show me the greatest rarity in all thecountry, and that I should have this to say of China, after all theill-humoured things that I had said of it, that I had seen onething which was not to be seen in all the world beside.  I was veryimportunate to know what it was; at last he told me it was agentleman's house built with China ware.  "Well," says I, "are notthe materials of their buildings the products of their own country,and so it is all China ware, is it not?" - "No, no," says he, "Imean it is a house all made of China ware, such as you call it inEngland, or as it is called in our country, porcelain." - "Well,"says I, "such a thing may be; how big is it?  Can we carry it in abox upon a camel?  If we can we will buy it." - "Upon a camel!"says the old pilot, holding up both his hands; "why, there is afamily of thirty people lives in it."

　　I was then curious, indeed, to see it; and when I came to it, itwas nothing but this:  it was a timber house, or a house built, aswe call it in England, with lath and plaster, but all thisplastering was really China ware - that is to say, it was plasteredwith the earth that makes China ware.  The outside, which the sunshone hot upon, was glazed, and looked very well, perfectly white,and painted with blue figures, as the large China ware in Englandis painted, and hard as if it had been burnt.  As to the inside,all the walls, instead of wainscot, were lined with hardened andpainted tiles, like the little square tiles we call galley-tiles inEngland, all made of the finest china, and the figures exceedingfine indeed, with extraordinary variety of colours, mixed withgold, many tiles making but one figure, but joined so artificially,the mortar being made of the same earth, that it was very hard tosee where the tiles met.  The floors of the rooms were of the samecomposition, and as hard as the earthen floors we have in use inseveral parts of England; as hard as stone, and smooth, but notburnt and painted, except some smaller rooms, like closets, whichwere all, as it were, paved with the same tile; the ceiling and allthe plastering work in the whole house were of the same earth; and,after all, the roof was covered with tiles of the same, but of adeep shining black.  This was a China warehouse indeed, truly andliterally to be called so, and had I not been upon the journey, Icould have stayed some days to see and examine the particulars ofit.  They told me there were fountains and fishponds in the garden,all paved on the bottom and sides with the same; and fine statuesset up in rows on the walks, entirely formed of the porcelainearth, burnt whole.

　　As this is one of the singularities of China, so they may beallowed to excel in it; but I am very sure they excel in theiraccounts of it; for they told me such incredible things of theirperformance in crockery-ware, for such it is, that I care not torelate, as knowing it could not be true.  They told me, inparticular, of one workman that made a ship with all its tackle andmasts and sails in earthenware, big enough to carry fifty men.  Ifthey had told me he launched it, and made a voyage to Japan in it,I might have said something to it indeed; but as it was, I knew thewhole of the story, which was, in short, that the fellow lied:  soI smiled, and said nothing to it.  This odd sight kept me two hoursbehind the caravan, for which the leader of it for the day fined meabout the value of three shillings; and told me if it had beenthree days' journey without the wall, as it was three days' within,he must have fined me four times as much, and made me ask pardonthe next council-day.  I promised to be more orderly; and, indeed,I found afterwards the orders made for keeping all together wereabsolutely necessary for our common safety.

　　In two days more we passed the great China wall, made for afortification against the Tartars:  and a very great work it is,going over hills and mountains in an endless track, where the rocksare impassable, and the precipices such as no enemy could possiblyenter, or indeed climb up, or where, if they did, no wall couldhinder them.  They tell us its length is near a thousand Englishmiles, but that the country is five hundred in a straight measuredline, which the wall bounds without measuring the windings andturnings it takes; it is about four fathoms high, and as many thickin some places.

　　I stood still an hour or thereabouts without trespassing on ourorders (for so long the caravan was in passing the gate), to lookat it on every side, near and far off; I mean what was within myview:  and the guide, who had been extolling it for the wonder ofthe world, was mighty eager to hear my opinion of it.  I told himit was a most excellent thing to keep out the Tartars; which hehappened not to understand as I meant it and so took it for acompliment; but the old pilot laughed!  "Oh, Seignior Inglese,"says he, "you speak in colours." - "In colours!" said I; "what doyou mean by that?" - "Why, you speak what looks white this way andblack that way - gay one way and dull another.  You tell him it is

　　a good wall to keep out Tartars; you tell me by that it is good fornothing but to keep out Tartars.  I understand you, SeigniorInglese, I understand you; but Seignior Chinese understood you hisown way." - "Well," says I, "do you think it would stand out anarmy of our country people, with a good train of artillery; or ourengineers, with two companies of miners?  Would not they batter itdown in ten days, that an army might enter in battalia; or blow itup in the air, foundation and all, that there should be no sign ofit left?" - "Ay, ay," says he, "I know that."  The Chinese wantedmightily to know what I said to the pilot, and I gave him leave totell him a few days after, for we were then almost out of theircountry, and he was to leave us a little time after this; but whenhe knew what I said, he was dumb all the rest of the way, and weheard no more of his fine story of the Chinese power and greatnesswhile he stayed.

　　After we passed this mighty nothing, called a wall, something likethe Picts' walls so famous in Northumberland, built by the Romans,we began to find the country thinly inhabited, and the peoplerather confined to live in fortified towns, as being subject to theinroads and depredations of the Tartars, who rob in great armies,and therefore are not to be resisted by the naked inhabitants of anopen country.  And here I began to find the necessity of keepingtogether in a caravan as we travelled, for we saw several troops ofTartars roving about; but when I came to see them distinctly, Iwondered more that the Chinese empire could be conquered by suchcontemptible fellows; for they are a mere horde of wild fellows,keeping no order and understanding no discipline or manner of it.Their horses are poor lean creatures, taught nothing, and fit fornothing; and this we found the first day we saw them, which wasafter we entered the wilder part of the country.  Our leader forthe day gave leave for about sixteen of us to go a hunting as theycall it; and what was this but a hunting of sheep! - however, itmay be called hunting too, for these creatures are the wildest andswiftest of foot that ever I saw of their kind! only they will notrun a great way, and you are sure of sport when you begin thechase, for they appear generally thirty or forty in a flock, and,like true sheep, always keep together when they fly.

　　In pursuit of this odd sort of game it was our hap to meet withabout forty Tartars:  whether they were hunting mutton, as we were,or whether they looked for another kind of prey, we know not; butas soon as they saw us, one of them blew a hideous blast on a kindof horn.  This was to call their friends about them, and in lessthan ten minutes a troop of forty or fifty more appeared, at abouta mile distance; but our work was over first, as it happened.

　　One of the Scots merchants of Moscow happened to be amongst us; andas soon as he heard the horn, he told us that we had nothing to dobut to charge them without loss of time; and drawing us up in aline, he asked if we were resolved.  We told him we were ready tofollow him; so he rode directly towards them.  They stood gazing atus like a mere crowd, drawn up in no sort of order at all; but assoon as they saw us advance, they let fly their arrows, whichmissed us, very happily.  Not that they mistook their aim, buttheir distance; for their arrows all fell a little short of us, butwith so true an aim, that had we been about twenty yards nearer wemust have had several men wounded, if not killed.

　　Immediately we halted, and though it was at a great distance, wefired, and sent them leaden bullets for wooden arrows, followingour shot full gallop, to fall in among them sword in hand - for soour bold Scot that led us directed.  He was, indeed, but amerchant, but he behaved with such vigour and bravery on thisoccasion, and yet with such cool courage too, that I never saw anyman in action fitter for command.  As soon as we came up to them wefired our pistols in their faces and then drew; but they fled inthe greatest confusion imaginable.  The only stand any of them madewas on our right, where three of them stood, and, by signs, calledthe rest to come back to them, having a kind of scimitar in theirhands, and their bows hanging to their backs.  Our brave commander,without asking anybody to follow him, gallops up close to them, andwith his fusee knocks one of them off his horse, killed the secondwith his pistol, and the third ran away.  Thus ended our fight; butwe had this misfortune attending it, that all our mutton we had inchase got away.  We had not a man killed or hurt; as for theTartars, there were about five of them killed - how many werewounded we knew not; but this we knew, that the other party were sofrightened with the noise of our guns that they fled, and nevermade any attempt upon us.

　　We were all this while in the Chinese dominions, and therefore theTartars were not so bold as afterwards; but in about five days weentered a vast wild desert, which held us three days' and nights'march; and we were obliged to carry our water with us in greatleathern bottles, and to encamp all night, just as I have heardthey do in the desert of Arabia.  I asked our guides whose dominionthis was in, and they told me this was a kind of border that mightbe called no man's land, being a part of Great Karakathy, or GrandTartary:  that, however, it was all reckoned as belonging to China,but that there was no care taken here to preserve it from theinroads of thieves, and therefore it was reckoned the worst desertin the whole march, though we were to go over some much larger.

　　In passing this frightful wilderness we saw, two or three times,little parties of the Tartars, but they seemed to be upon their ownaffairs, and to have no design upon us; and so, like the man whomet the devil, if they had nothing to say to us, we had nothing tosay to them:  we let them go.  Once, however, a party of them cameso near as to stand and gaze at us.  Whether it was to consider ifthey should attack us or not, we knew not; but when we had passedat some distance by them, we made a rear-guard of forty men, andstood ready for them, letting the caravan pass half a mile orthereabouts before us.  After a while they marched off, but theysaluted us with five arrows at their parting, which wounded a horseso that it disabled him, and we left him the next day, poorcreature, in great need of a good farrier.  We saw no more arrowsor Tartars that time.

　　We travelled near a month after this, the ways not being so good asat first, though still in the dominions of the Emperor of China,but lay for the most part in the villages, some of which werefortified, because of the incursions of the Tartars.  When we werecome to one of these towns (about two days and a half's journeybefore we came to the city of Naum), I wanted to buy a camel, ofwhich there are plenty to be sold all the way upon that road, andhorses also, such as they are, because, so many caravans comingthat way, they are often wanted.  The person that I spoke to to getme a camel would have gone and fetched one for me; but I, like afool, must be officious, and go myself along with him; the placewas about two miles out of the village, where it seems they keptthe camels and horses feeding under a guard.

　　I walked it on foot, with my old pilot and a Chinese, being verydesirous of a little variety.  When we came to the place it was alow, marshy ground, walled round with stones, piled up dry, withoutmortar or earth among them, like a park, with a little guard ofChinese soldiers at the door.  Having bought a camel, and agreedfor the price, I came away, and the Chinese that went with me ledthe camel, when on a sudden came up five Tartars on horseback.  Twoof them seized the fellow and took the camel from him, while theother three stepped up to me and my old pilot, seeing us, as itwere, unarmed, for I had no weapon about me but my sword, whichcould but ill defend me against three horsemen.  The first thatcame up stopped short upon my drawing my sword, for they are arrantcowards; but a second, coming upon my left, gave me a blow on thehead, which I never felt till afterwards, and wondered, when I cameto myself, what was the matter, and where I was, for he laid meflat on the ground; but my never-failing old pilot, the Portuguese,had a pistol in his pocket, which I knew nothing of, nor theTartars either:  if they had, I suppose they would not haveattacked us, for cowards are always boldest when there is nodanger.  The old man seeing me down, with a bold heart stepped upto the fellow that had struck me, and laying hold of his arm withone hand, and pulling him down by main force a little towards him,with the other shot him into the head, and laid him dead upon thespot.  He then immediately stepped up to him who had stopped us, asI said, and before he could come forward again, made a blow at himwith a scimitar, which he always wore, but missing the man, struckhis horse in the side of his head, cut one of the ears off by theroot, and a great slice down by the side of his face.  The poorbeast, enraged with the wound, was no more to be governed by hisrider, though the fellow sat well enough too, but away he flew, andcarried him quite out of the pilot's reach; and at some distance,rising upon his hind legs, threw down the Tartar, and fell uponhim.

　　In this interval the poor Chinese came in who had lost the camel,but he had no weapon; however, seeing the Tartar down, and hishorse fallen upon him, away he runs to him, and seizing upon anugly weapon he had by his side, something like a pole-axe, hewrenched it from him, and made shift to knock his Tartarian brainsout with it.  But my old man had the third Tartar to deal withstill; and seeing he did not fly, as he expected, nor come on tofight him, as he apprehended, but stood stock still, the old manstood still too, and fell to work with his tackle to charge hispistol again:  but as soon as the Tartar saw the pistol away hescoured, and left my pilot, my champion I called him afterwards, acomplete victory.

　　By this time I was a little recovered.  I thought, when I firstbegan to wake, that I had been in a sweet sleep; but, as I saidabove, I wondered where I was, how I came upon the ground, and whatwas the matter.  A few moments after, as sense returned, I feltpain, though I did not know where; so I clapped my hand to my head,and took it away bloody; then I felt my head ache:  and in a momentmemory returned, and everything was present to me again.  I jumpedupon my feet instantly, and got hold of my sword, but no enemieswere in view:  I found a Tartar lying dead, and his horse standingvery quietly by him; and, looking further, I saw my deliverer, whohad been to see what the Chinese had done, coming back with hishanger in his hand.  The old man, seeing me on my feet, camerunning to me, and joyfully embraced me, being afraid before that Ihad been killed.  Seeing me bloody, he would see how I was hurt;but it was not much, only what we call a broken head; neither did Iafterwards find any great inconvenience from the blow, for it waswell again in two or three days.

　　We made no great gain, however, by this victory, for we lost acamel and gained a horse.  I paid for the lost camel, and sent foranother; but I did not go to fetch it myself:  I had had enough ofthat.

　　The city of Naum, which we were approaching, is a frontier of theChinese empire, and is fortified in their fashion.  We wanted, as Ihave said, above two days' journey of this city when messengerswere sent express to every part of the road to tell all travellersand caravans to halt till they had a guard sent for them; for thatan unusual body of Tartars, making ten thousand in all, hadappeared in the way, about thirty miles beyond the city.

　　This was very bad news to travellers:  however, it was carefullydone of the governor, and we were very glad to hear we should havea guard.  Accordingly, two days after, we had two hundred soldierssent us from a garrison of the Chinese on our left, and threehundred more from the city of Naum, and with these we advancedboldly.  The three hundred soldiers from Naum marched in our front,the two hundred in our rear, and our men on each side of ourcamels, with our baggage and the whole caravan in the centre; inthis order, and well prepared for battle, we thought ourselves amatch for the whole ten thousand Mogul Tartars, if they hadappeared; but the next day, when they did appear, it was quiteanother thing.

　　CHAPTER XV - DESCRIPTION OF AN IDOL, WHICH THEY DESTROY

　　EARLY in the morning, when marching from a little town calledChangu, we had a river to pass, which we were obliged to ferry;and, had the Tartars had any intelligence, then had been the timeto have attacked us, when the caravan being over, the rear-guardwas behind; but they did not appear there.  About three hoursafter, when we were entered upon a desert of about fifteen orsixteen miles over, we knew by a cloud of dust they raised, thatthe enemy was at hand, and presently they came on upon the spur.

　　Our Chinese guards in the front, who had talked so big the daybefore, began to stagger; and the soldiers frequently looked behindthem, a certain sign in a soldier that he is just ready to runaway.  My old pilot was of my mind; and being near me, called out,"Seignior Inglese, these fellows must be encouraged, or they willruin us all; for if the Tartars come on they will never stand it."- "If am of your mind," said I; "but what must be done?" - "Done?"says he, "let fifty of our men advance, and flank them on eachwing, and encourage them.  They will fight like brave fellows inbrave company; but without this they will every man turn his back."Immediately I rode up to our leader and told him, who was exactlyof our mind; accordingly, fifty of us marched to the right wing,and fifty to the left, and the rest made a line of rescue; and sowe marched, leaving the last two hundred men to make a body ofthemselves, and to guard the camels; only that, if need were, theyshould send a hundred men to assist the last fifty.

　　At last the Tartars came on, and an innumerable company they were;how many we could not tell, but ten thousand, we thought, at theleast.  A party of them came on first, and viewed our posture,traversing the ground in the front of our line; and, as we foundthem within gunshot, our leader ordered the two wings to advanceswiftly, and give them a salvo on each wing with their shot, whichwas done.  They then went off, I suppose to give an account of thereception they were like to meet with; indeed, that salute cloyedtheir stomachs, for they immediately halted, stood a while toconsider of it, and wheeling off to the left, they gave over theirdesign for that time, which was very agreeable to ourcircumstances.

　　Two days after we came to the city of Naun, or Naum; we thanked thegovernor for his care of us, and collected to the value of ahundred crowns, or thereabouts, which we gave to the soldiers sentto guard us; and here we rested one day.  This is a garrisonindeed, and there were nine hundred soldiers kept here; but thereason of it was, that formerly the Muscovite frontiers lay nearerto them than they now do, the Muscovites having abandoned that partof the country, which lies from this city west for about twohundred miles, as desolate and unfit for use; and more especiallybeing so very remote, and so difficult to send troops thither forits defence; for we were yet above two thousand miles from Muscovyproperly so called.  After this we passed several great rivers, andtwo dreadful deserts; one of which we were sixteen days passingover; and on the 13th of April we came to the frontiers of theMuscovite dominions.  I think the first town or fortress, whicheverit may he called, that belonged to the Czar, was called Arguna,being on the west side of the river Arguna.

　　I could not but feel great satisfaction that I was arrived in acountry governed by Christians; for though the Muscovites do, in myopinion, but just deserve the name of Christians, yet such theypretend to be, and are very devout in their way.  It wouldcertainly occur to any reflecting man who travels the world as Ihave done, what a blessing it is to be brought into the world wherethe name of God and a Redeemer is known, adored, and worshipped;and not where the people, given up to strong delusions, worship thedevil, and prostrate themselves to monsters, elements, horrid-shaped animals, and monstrous images.  Not a town or city we passedthrough but had their pagodas, their idols, and their temples, andignorant people worshipping even the works of their own hands.  Nowwe came where, at least, a face of the Christian worship appeared;where the knee was bowed to Jesus:  and whether ignorantly or not,yet the Christian religion was owned, and the name of the true Godwas called upon and adored; and it made my soul rejoice to see it.I saluted the brave Scots merchant with my first acknowledgment ofthis; and taking him by the hand, I said to him, "Blessed be God,we are once again amongst Christians."  He smiled, and answered,"Do not rejoice too soon, countryman; these Muscovites are but anodd sort of Christians; and but for the name of it you may see verylittle of the substance for some months further of our journey." -"Well," says I, "but still it is better than paganism, andworshipping of devils." - "Why, I will tell you," says he; "exceptthe Russian soldiers in the garrisons, and a few of the inhabitantsof the cities upon the road, all the rest of this country, forabove a thousand miles farther, is inhabited by the worst and mostignorant of pagans."  And so, indeed, we found it.

　　We now launched into the greatest piece of solid earth that is tobe found in any part of the world; we had, at least, twelvethousand miles to the sea eastward; two thousand to the bottom ofthe Baltic Sea westward; and above three thousand, if we left thatsea, and went on west, to the British and French channels:  we hadfull five thousand miles to the Indian or Persian Sea south; andabout eight hundred to the Frozen Sea north.

　　We advanced from the river Arguna by easy and moderate journeys,and were very visibly obliged to the care the Czar has taken tohave cities and towns built in as many places as it is possible toplace them, where his soldiers keep garrison, something like thestationary soldiers placed by the Romans in the remotest countriesof their empire; some of which I had read of were placed inBritain, for the security of commerce, and for the lodging oftravellers.  Thus it was here; for wherever we came, though atthese towns and stations the garrisons and governors were Russians,and professed Christians, yet the inhabitants were mere pagans,sacrificing to idols, and worshipping the sun, moon, and stars, orall the host of heaven; and not only so, but were, of all theheathens and pagans that ever I met with, the most barbarous,except only that they did not eat men's flesh.

　　Some instances of this we met with in the country between Arguna,where we enter the Muscovite dominions, and a city of Tartars andRussians together, called Nortziousky, in which is a continueddesert or forest, which cost us twenty days to travel over.  In avillage near the last of these places I had the curiosity to go andsee their way of living, which is most brutish and unsufferable.They had, I suppose, a great sacrifice that day; for there stoodout, upon an old stump of a tree, a diabolical kind of idol made ofwood; it was dressed up, too, in the most filthy manner; its uppergarment was of sheepskins, with the wool outward; a great Tartarbonnet on the head, with two horns growing through it; it was abouteight feet high, yet had no feet or legs, nor any other proportionof parts.

　　This scarecrow was set up at the outer side of the village; andwhen I came near to it there were sixteen or seventeen creaturesall lying flat upon the ground round this hideous block of wood; Isaw no motion among them, any more than if they had been all logs,like the idol, and at first I really thought they had been so; but,when I came a little nearer, they started up upon their feet, andraised a howl, as if it had been so many deep-mouthed hounds, andwalked away, as if they were displeased at our disturbing them.  Alittle way off from the idol, and at the door of a hut, made ofsheep and cow skins dried, stood three men with long knives intheir hands; and in the middle of the tent appeared three sheepkilled, and one young bullock.  These, it seems, were sacrifices tothat senseless log of an idol; the three men were priests belongingto it, and the seventeen prostrated wretches were the people whobrought the offering, and were offering their prayers to thatstock.

　　I confess I was more moved at their stupidity and brutish worshipof a hobgoblin than ever I was at anything in my life, and,overcome with rage, I rode up to the hideous idol, and with mysword made a stroke at the bonnet that was on its head, and cut itin two; and one of our men that was with me, taking hold of thesheepskin that covered it, pulled at it, when, behold, a mosthideous outcry ran through the village, and two or three hundredpeople came about my ears, so that I was glad to scour for it, forsome had bows and arrows; but I resolved from that moment to visitthem again.  Our caravan rested three nights at the town, which wasabout four miles off, in order to provide some horses which theywanted, several of the horses having been lamed and jaded with thelong march over the last desert; so we had some leisure here to putmy design in execution.  I communicated it to the Scots merchant,of whose courage I had sufficient testimony; I told him what I hadseen, and with what indignation I had since thought that humannature could be so degenerate; I told him if I could get but fouror five men well armed to go with me, I was resolved to go anddestroy that vile, abominable idol, and let them see that it had nopower to help itself, and consequently could not be an object ofworship, or to be prayed to, much less help them that offeredsacrifices to it.

　　He at first objected to my plan as useless, seeing that, owing tothe gross ignorance of the people, they could not be brought toprofit by the lesson I meant to teach them; and added that, fromhis knowledge of the country and its customs, he feared we shouldfall into great peril by giving offence to these brutal idolworshippers.  This somewhat stayed my purpose, but I was stilluneasy all that day to put my project in execution; and thatevening, meeting the Scots merchant in our walk about the town, Iagain called upon him to aid me in it.  When he found me resolutehe said that, on further thoughts, he could not but applaud thedesign, and told me I should not go alone, but he would go with me;but he would go first and bring a stout fellow, one of hiscountrymen, to go also with us; "and one," said he, "as famous forhis zeal as you can desire any one to be against such devilishthings as these."  So we agreed to go, only we three and my man-servant, and resolved to put it in execution the following nightabout midnight, with all possible secrecy.

　　We thought it better to delay it till the next night, because thecaravan being to set forward in the morning, we suppose thegovernor could not pretend to give them any satisfaction upon uswhen we were out of his power.  The Scots merchant, as steady inhis resolution for the enterprise as bold in executing, brought mea Tartar's robe or gown of sheepskins, and a bonnet, with a bow andarrows, and had provided the same for himself and his countryman,that the people, if they saw us, should not determine who we were.All the first night we spent in mixing up some combustible matter,with aqua vitae, gunpowder, and such other materials as we couldget; and having a good quantity of tar in a little pot, about anhour after night we set out upon our expedition.

　　We came to the place about eleven o'clock at night, and found thatthe people had not the least suspicion of danger attending theiridol.  The night was cloudy:  yet the moon gave us light enough tosee that the idol stood just in the same posture and place that itdid before.  The people seemed to be all at their rest; only thatin the great hut, where we saw the three priests, we saw a light,and going up close to the door, we heard people talking as if therewere five or six of them; we concluded, therefore, that if we setwildfire to the idol, those men would come out immediately, and runup to the place to rescue it from destruction; and what to do withthem we knew not.  Once we thought of carrying it away, and settingfire to it at a distance; but when we came to handle it, we foundit too bulky for our carriage, so we were at a loss again.  Thesecond Scotsman was for setting fire to the hut, and knocking thecreatures that were there on the head when they came out; but Icould not join with that; I was against killing them, if it werepossible to avoid it.  "Well, then," said the Scots merchant, "Iwill tell you what we will do:  we will try to make them prisoners,tie their hands, and make them stand and see their idol destroyed."

　　As it happened, we had twine or packthread enough about us, whichwe used to tie our firelocks together with; so we resolved toattack these people first, and with as little noise as we could.The first thing we did, we knocked at the door, when one of thepriests coming to it, we immediately seized upon him, stopped hismouth, and tied his hands behind him, and led him to the idol,where we gagged him that he might not make a noise, tied his feetalso together, and left him on the ground.

　　Two of us then waited at the door, expecting that another wouldcome out to see what the matter was; but we waited so long till thethird man came back to us; and then nobody coming out, we knockedagain gently, and immediately out came two more, and we served themjust in the same manner, but were obliged to go all with them, andlay them down by the idol some distance from one another; when,going back, we found two more were come out of the door, and athird stood behind them within the door.  We seized the two, andimmediately tied them, when the third, stepping back and cryingout, my Scots merchant went in after them, and taking out acomposition we had made that would only smoke and stink, he setfire to it, and threw it in among them.  By that time the otherScotsman and my man, taking charge of the two men already bound,and tied together also by the arm, led them away to the idol, andleft them there, to see if their idol would relieve them, makinghaste back to us.

　　When the fuze we had thrown in had filled the hut with so muchsmoke that they were almost suffocated, we threw in a small leatherbag of another kind, which flamed like a candle, and, following itin, we found there were but four people, who, as we supposed, hadbeen about some of their diabolical sacrifices.  They appeared, inshort, frightened to death, at least so as to sit trembling andstupid, and not able to speak either, for the smoke.

　　We quickly took them from the hut, where the smoke soon drove usout, bound them as we had done the other, and all without anynoise.  Then we carried them all together to the idol; when we camethere, we fell to work with him.  First, we daubed him all over,and his robes also, with tar, and tallow mixed with brimstone; thenwe stopped his eyes and ears and mouth full of gunpowder, andwrapped up a great piece of wildfire in his bonnet; then stickingall the combustibles we had brought with us upon him, we lookedabout to see if we could find anything else to help to burn him;when my Scotsman remembered that by the hut, where the men were,there lay a heap of dry forage; away he and the other Scotsman ranand fetched their arms full of that.  When we had done this, wetook all our prisoners, and brought them, having untied their feetand ungagged their mouths, and made them stand up, and set thembefore their monstrous idol, and then set fire to the whole.

　　We stayed by it a quarter of an hour or thereabouts, till thepowder in the eyes and mouth and ears of the idol blew up, and, aswe could perceive, had split altogether; and in a word, till we sawit burned so that it would soon be quite consumed.  We then beganto think of going away; but the Scotsman said, "No, we must not go,for these poor deluded wretches will all throw themselves into thefire, and burn themselves with the idol."  So we resolved to staytill the forage has burned down too, and then came away and leftthem.  After the feat was performed, we appeared in the morningamong our fellow-travellers, exceedingly busy in getting ready forour journey; nor could any man suppose that we had been anywherebut in our beds.

　　But the affair did not end so; the next day came a great number ofthe country people to the town gates, and in a most outrageousmanner demanded satisfaction of the Russian governor for theinsulting their priests and burning their great Cham Chi-Thaungu.The people of Nertsinkay were at first in a great consternation,for they said the Tartars were already no less than thirty thousandstrong.  The Russian governor sent out messengers to appease them,assuring them that he knew nothing of it, and that there had not asoul in his garrison been abroad, so that it could not be fromanybody there:  but if they could let him know who did it, theyshould be exemplarily punished.  They returned haughtily, that allthe country reverenced the great Cham Chi-Thaungu, who dwelt in thesun, and no mortal would have dared to offer violence to his imagebut some Christian miscreant; and they therefore resolved todenounce war against him and all the Russians, who, they said, weremiscreants and Christians.

　　The governor, unwilling to make a breach, or to have any cause ofwar alleged to be given by him, the Czar having strictly chargedhim to treat the conquered country with gentleness, gave them allthe good words he could.  At last he told them there was a caravangone towards Russia that morning, and perhaps it was some of themwho had done them this injury; and that if they would be satisfiedwith that, he would send after them to inquire into it.  Thisseemed to appease them a little; and accordingly the governor sentafter us, and gave us a particular account how the thing was;intimating withal, that if any in our caravan had done it theyshould make their escape; but that whether we had done it or no, weshould make all the haste forward that was possible:  and that, inthe meantime, he would keep them in play as long as he could.

　　This was very friendly in the governor; however, when it came tothe caravan, there was nobody knew anything of the matter; and asfor us that were guilty, we were least of all suspected.  However,the captain of the caravan for the time took the hint that thegovernor gave us, and we travelled two days and two nights withoutany considerable stop, and then we lay at a village called Plothus:nor did we make any long stop here, but hastened on towardsJarawena, another Muscovite colony, and where we expected we shouldbe safe.  But upon the second day's march from Plothus, by theclouds of dust behind us at a great distance, it was plain we werepursued.  We had entered a vast desert, and had passed by a greatlake called Schanks Oser, when we perceived a large body of horseappear on the other side of the lake, to the north, we travellingwest.  We observed they went away west, as we did, but had supposedwe would have taken that side of the lake, whereas we very happilytook the south side; and in two days more they disappeared again:for they, believing we were still before them, pushed on till theycame to the Udda, a very great river when it passes farther north,but when we came to it we found it narrow and fordable.

　　The third day they had either found their mistake, or hadintelligence of us, and came pouring in upon us towards dusk.  Wehad, to our great satisfaction, just pitched upon a convenientplace for our camp; for as we had just entered upon a desert abovefive hundred miles over, where we had no towns to lodge at, and,indeed, expected none but the city Jarawena, which we had yet twodays' march to; the desert, however, had some few woods in it onthis side, and little rivers, which ran all into the great riverUdda; it was in a narrow strait, between little but very thickwoods, that we pitched our camp that night, expecting to beattacked before morning.  As it was usual for the Mogul Tartars togo about in troops in that desert, so the caravans always fortifythemselves every night against them, as against armies of robbers;and it was, therefore, no new thing to be pursued.  But we had thisnight a most advantageous camp:  for as we lay between two woods,with a little rivulet running just before our front, we could notbe surrounded, or attacked any way but in our front or rear.  Wetook care also to make our front as strong as we could, by placingour packs, with the camels and horses, all in a line, on the insideof the river, and felling some trees in our rear.

　　In this posture we encamped for the night; but the enemy was uponus before we had finished.  They did not come on like thieves, aswe expected, but sent three messengers to us, to demand the men tobe delivered to them that had abused their priests and burned theiridol, that they might burn them with fire; and upon this, theysaid, they would go away, and do us no further harm, otherwise theywould destroy us all.  Our men looked very blank at this message,and began to stare at one another to see who looked with the mostguilt in their faces; but nobody was the word - nobody did it.  Theleader of the caravan sent word he was well assured that it was notdone by any of our camp; that we were peaceful merchants,travelling on our business; that we had done no harm to them or toany one else; and that, therefore, they must look further for theenemies who had injured them, for we were not the people; so theydesired them not to disturb us, for if they did we should defendourselves.

　　They were far from being satisfied with this for an answer:  and agreat crowd of them came running down in the morning, by break ofday, to our camp; but seeing us so well posted, they durst come nofarther than the brook in our front, where they stood in suchnumber as to terrify us very much; indeed, some spoke of tenthousand.  Here they stood and looked at us a while, and then,setting up a great howl, let fly a crowd of arrows among us; but wewere well enough sheltered under our baggage, and I do not rememberthat one of us was hurt.

　　Some time after this we saw them move a little to our right, andexpected them on the rear:  when a cunning fellow, a Cossack ofJarawena, calling to the leader of the caravan, said to him, "Iwill send all these people away to Sibeilka."  This was a city fouror five days' journey at least to the right, and rather behind us.So he takes his bow and arrows, and getting on horseback, he ridesaway from our rear directly, as it were back to Nertsinskay; afterthis he takes a great circuit about, and comes directly on the armyof the Tartars as if he had been sent express to tell them a longstory that the people who had burned the Cham Chi-Thaungu were goneto Sibeilka, with a caravan of miscreants, as he called them - thatis to say, Christians; and that they had resolved to burn the godScal-Isar, belonging to the Tonguses.  As this fellow was himself aTartar, and perfectly spoke their language, he counterfeited sowell that they all believed him, and away they drove in a violenthurry to Sibeilka.  In less than three hours they were entirely outof our sight, and we never heard any more of them, nor whether theywent to Sibeilka or no.  So we passed away safely on to Jarawena,where there was a Russian garrison, and there we rested five days.

　　From this city we had a frightful desert, which held us twenty-three days' march.  We furnished ourselves with some tents here,for the better accommodating ourselves in the night; and the leaderof the caravan procured sixteen waggons of the country, forcarrying our water or provisions, and these carriages were ourdefence every night round our little camp; so that had the Tartarsappeared, unless they had been very numerous indeed, they would nothave been able to hurt us.  We may well be supposed to have wantedrest again after this long journey; for in this desert we neithersaw house nor tree, and scarce a bush; though we saw abundance ofthe sable-hunters, who are all Tartars of Mogul Tartary; of whichthis country is a part; and they frequently attack small caravans,but we saw no numbers of them together.

　　After we had passed this desert we came into a country pretty wellinhabited - that is to say, we found towns and castles, settled bythe Czar with garrisons of stationary soldiers, to protect thecaravans and defend the country against the Tartars, who wouldotherwise make it very dangerous travelling; and his czarishmajesty has given such strict orders for the well guarding thecaravans, that, if there are any Tartars heard of in the country,detachments of the garrison are always sent to see the travellerssafe from station to station.  Thus the governor of Adinskoy, whomI had an opportunity to make a visit to, by means of the Scotsmerchant, who was acquainted with him, offered us a guard of fiftymen, if we thought there was any danger, to the next station.

　　I thought, long before this, that as we came nearer to Europe weshould find the country better inhabited, and the people morecivilised; but I found myself mistaken in both:  for we had yet thenation of the Tonguses to pass through, where we saw the sametokens of paganism and barbarity as before; only, as they wereconquered by the Muscovites, they were not so dangerous, but forrudeness of manners and idolatry no people in the world ever wentbeyond them.  They are all clothed in skins of beasts, and theirhouses are built of the same; you know not a man from a woman,neither by the ruggedness of their countenances nor their clothes;and in the winter, when the ground is covered with snow, they liveunderground in vaults, which have cavities going from one toanother.  If the Tartars had their Cham Chi-Thaungu for a wholevillage or country, these had idols in every hut and every cave.This country, I reckon, was, from the desert I spoke of last, atleast four hundred miles, half of it being another desert, whichtook us up twelve days' severe travelling, without house or tree;and we were obliged again to carry our own provisions, as wellwater as bread.  After we were out of this desert and had travelledtwo days, we came to Janezay, a Muscovite city or station, on thegreat river Janezay, which, they told us there, parted Europe fromAsia.

　　All the country between the river Oby and the river Janezay is asentirely pagan, and the people as barbarous, as the remotest of theTartars.  I also found, which I observed to the Muscovite governorswhom I had an opportunity to converse with, that the poor pagansare not much wiser, or nearer Christianity, for being under theMuscovite government, which they acknowledged was true enough - butthat, as they said, was none of their business; that if the Czarexpected to convert his Siberian, Tonguse, or Tartar subjects, itshould be done by sending clergymen among them, not soldiers; andthey added, with more sincerity than I expected, that it was not somuch the concern of their monarch to make the people Christians asto make them subjects.

　　From this river to the Oby we crossed a wild uncultivated country,barren of people and good management, otherwise it is in itself apleasant, fruitful, and agreeable country.  What inhabitants wefound in it are all pagans, except such as are sent among them fromRussia; for this is the country - I mean on both sides the riverOby - whither the Muscovite criminals that are not put to death arebanished, and from whence it is next to impossible they should everget away.  I have nothing material to say of my particular affairstill I came to Tobolski, the capital city of Siberia, where Icontinued some time on the following account.

　　We had now been almost seven months on our journey, and winterbegan to come on apace; whereupon my partner and I called a councilabout our particular affairs, in which we found it proper, as wewere bound for England, to consider how to dispose of ourselves.They told us of sledges and reindeer to carry us over the snow inthe winter time, by which means, indeed, the Russians travel morein winter than they can in summer, as in these sledges they areable to run night and day:  the snow, being frozen, is oneuniversal covering to nature, by which the hills, vales, rivers,and lakes are all smooth and hard is a stone, and they run upon thesurface, without any regard to what is underneath.

　　But I had no occasion to urge a winter journey of this kind.  I wasbound to England, not to Moscow, and my route lay two ways:  eitherI must go on as the caravan went, till I came to Jarislaw, and thengo off west for Narva and the Gulf of Finland, and so on toDantzic, where I might possibly sell my China cargo to goodadvantage; or I must leave the caravan at a little town on theDwina, from whence I had but six days by water to Archangel, andfrom thence might be sure of shipping either to England, Holland,or Hamburg.

　　Now, to go any one of these journeys in the winter would have beenpreposterous; for as to Dantzic, the Baltic would have been frozenup and I could not get passage; and to go by land in thosecountries was far less safe than among the Mogul Tartars; likewise,as to Archangel in October, all the ships would be gone fromthence, and even the merchants who dwell there in summer retiresouth to Moscow in the winter, when the ships are gone; so that Icould have nothing but extremity of cold to encounter, with ascarcity of provisions, and must lie in an empty town all thewinter.  Therefore, upon the whole, I thought it much my better wayto let the caravan go, and make provision to winter where I was, atTobolski, in Siberia, in the latitude of about sixty degrees, whereI was sure of three things to wear out a cold winter with, viz.plenty of provisions, such as the country afforded, a warm house,with fuel enough, and excellent company.

　　I was now in quite a different climate from my beloved island,where I never felt cold, except when I had my ague; on thecontrary, I had much to do to bear any clothes on my back, andnever made any fire but without doors, which was necessary fordressing my food, &c.  Now I had three good vests, with large robesor gowns over them, to hang down to the feet, and button close tothe wrists; and all these lined with furs, to make themsufficiently warm.  As to a warm house, I must confess I greatlydislike our way in England of making fires in every room of thehouse in open chimneys, which, when the fire is out, always keepsthe air in the room cold as the climate.  So I took an apartment ina good house in the town, and ordered a chimney to be built like afurnace, in the centre of six several rooms, like a stove; thefunnel to carry the smoke went up one way, the door to come at thefire went in another, and all the rooms were kept equally warm, butno fire seen, just as they heat baths in England.  By this means wehad always the same climate in all the rooms, and an equal heat waspreserved, and yet we saw no fire, nor were ever incommoded withsmoke.

　　The most wonderful thing of all was, that it should be possible tomeet with good company here, in a country so barbarous as this -one of the most northerly parts of Europe.  But this being thecountry where the state criminals of Muscovy, as I observed before,are all banished, the city was full of Russian noblemen, gentlemen,soldiers, and courtiers.  Here was the famous Prince Galitzin, theold German Robostiski, and several other persons of note, and someladies.  By means of my Scotch merchant, whom, nevertheless, Iparted with here, I made an acquaintance with several of thesegentlemen; and from these, in the long winter nights in which Istayed here, I received several very agreeable visits.

　　CHAPTER XVI - SAFE ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND

　　IT was talking one night with a certain prince, one of the banishedministers of state belonging to the Czar, that the discourse of myparticular case began.  He had been telling me abundance of finethings of the greatness, the magnificence, the dominions, and theabsolute power of the Emperor of the Russians:  I interrupted him,and told him I was a greater and more powerful prince than ever theCzar was, though my dominion were not so large, or my people somany.  The Russian grandee looked a little surprised, and, fixinghis eyes steadily upon me, began to wonder what I meant.  I saidhis wonder would cease when I had explained myself, and told himthe story at large of my living in the island; and then how Imanaged both myself and the people that were under me, just as Ihave since minuted it down.  They were exceedingly taken with thestory, and especially the prince, who told me, with a sigh, thatthe true greatness of life was to be masters of ourselves; that hewould not have exchanged such a state of life as mine to be Czar ofMuscovy; and that he found more felicity in the retirement heseemed to be banished to there, than ever he found in the highestauthority he enjoyed in the court of his master the Czar; that theheight of human wisdom was to bring our tempers down to ourcircumstances, and to make a calm within, under the weight of thegreatest storms without.  When he came first hither, he said, heused to tear the hair from his head, and the clothes from his back,as others had done before him; but a little time and considerationhad made him look into himself, as well as round him to thingswithout; that he found the mind of man, if it was but once broughtto reflect upon the state of universal life, and how little thisworld was concerned in its true felicity, was perfectly capable ofmaking a felicity for itself, fully satisfying to itself, andsuitable to its own best ends and desires, with but very littleassistance from the world.  That being now deprived of all thefancied felicity which he enjoyed in the full exercise of worldlypleasures, he said he was at leisure to look upon the dark side ofthem, where he found all manner of deformity; and was now convincedthat virtue only makes a man truly wise, rich, and great, andpreserves him in the way to a superior happiness in a future state;and in this, he said, they were more happy in their banishment thanall their enemies were, who had the full possession of all thewealth and power they had left behind them.  "Nor, sir," says he,"do I bring my mind to this politically, from the necessity of mycircumstances, which some call miserable; but, if I know anythingof myself, I would not now go back, though the Czar my mastershould call me, and reinstate me in all my former grandeur."

　　He spoke this with so much warmth in his temper, so muchearnestness and motion of his spirits, that it was evident it wasthe true sense of his soul; there was no room to doubt hissincerity.  I told him I once thought myself a kind of monarch inmy old station, of which I had given him an account; but that Ithought he was not only a monarch, but a great conqueror; for hethat had got a victory over his own exorbitant desires, and theabsolute dominion over himself, he whose reason entirely governshis will, is certainly greater than he that conquers a city.

　　I had been here eight months, and a dark, dreadful winter I thoughtit; the cold so intense that I could not so much as look abroadwithout being wrapped in furs, and a kind of mask of fur before myface, with only a hole for breath, and two for sight:  the littledaylight we had was for three months not above five hours a day,and six at most; only that the snow lying on the groundcontinually, and the weather being clear, it was never quite dark.Our horses were kept, or rather starved, underground; and as forour servants, whom we hired here to look after ourselves andhorses, we had, every now and then, their fingers and toes to thawand take care of, lest they should mortify and fall off.

　　It is true, within doors we were warm, the houses being close, thewalls thick, the windows small, and the glass all double.  Our foodwas chiefly the flesh of deer, dried and cured in the season; breadgood enough, but baked as biscuits; dried fish of several sorts,and some flesh of mutton, and of buffaloes, which is pretty goodmeat.  All the stores of provisions for the winter are laid up inthe summer, and well cured:  our drink was water, mixed with aquavitae instead of brandy; and for a treat, mead instead of wine,which, however, they have very good.  The hunters, who ventureabroad all weathers, frequently brought us in fine venison, andsometimes bear's flesh, but we did not much care for the last.  Wehad a good stock of tea, with which we treated our friends, and welived cheerfully and well, all things considered.

　　It was now March, the days grown considerably longer, and theweather at least tolerable; so the other travellers began toprepare sledges to carry them over the snow, and to get thingsready to be going; but my measures being fixed, as I have said, forArchangel, and not for Muscovy or the Baltic, I made no motion;knowing very well that the ships from the south do not set out forthat part of the world till May or June, and that if I was there bythe beginning of August, it would be as soon as any ships would beready to sail.  Therefore I made no haste to be gone, as othersdid:  in a word, I saw a great many people, nay, all thetravellers, go away before me.  It seems every year they go fromthence to Muscovy, for trade, to carry furs, and buy necessaries,which they bring back with them to furnish their shops:  alsoothers went on the same errand to Archangel.

　　In the month of May I began to make all ready to pack up; and, as Iwas doing this, it occurred to me that, seeing all these peoplewere banished by the Czar to Siberia, and yet, when they camethere, were left at liberty to go whither they would, why they didnot then go away to any part of the world, wherever they thoughtfit:  and I began to examine what should hinder them from makingsuch an attempt.  But my wonder was over when I entered upon thatsubject with the person I have mentioned, who answered me thus:"Consider, first, sir," said he, "the place where we are; and,secondly, the condition we are in; especially the generality of thepeople who are banished thither.  We are surrounded with strongerthings than bars or bolts; on the north side, an unnavigable ocean,where ship never sailed, and boat never swam; every other way wehave above a thousand miles to pass through the Czar's owndominion, and by ways utterly impassable, except by the roads madeby the government, and through the towns garrisoned by his troops;in short, we could neither pass undiscovered by the road, norsubsist any other way, so that it is in vain to attempt it."

　　I was silenced at once, and found that they were in a prison everyjot as secure as if they had been locked up in the castle atMoscow:  however, it came into my thoughts that I might certainlybe made an instrument to procure the escape of this excellentperson; and that, whatever hazard I ran, I would certainly try if Icould carry him off.  Upon this, I took an occasion one evening totell him my thoughts.  I represented to him that it was very easyfor me to carry him away, there being no guard over him in thecountry; and as I was not going to Moscow, but to Archangel, andthat I went in the retinue of a caravan, by which I was not obligedto lie in the stationary towns in the desert, but could encampevery night where I would, we might easily pass uninterrupted toArchangel, where I would immediately secure him on board an Englishship, and carry him safe along with me; and as to his subsistenceand other particulars, it should be my care till he could bettersupply himself.

　　He heard me very attentively, and looked earnestly on me all thewhile I spoke; nay, I could see in his very face that what I saidput his spirits into an exceeding ferment; his colour frequentlychanged, his eyes looked red, and his heart fluttered, till itmight be even perceived in his countenance; nor could heimmediately answer me when I had done, and, as it were, hesitatedwhat he would say to it; but after he had paused a little, heembraced me, and said, "How unhappy are we, unguarded creatures aswe are, that even our greatest acts of friendship are made snaresunto us, and we are made tempters of one another!"  He thenheartily thanked me for my offers of service, but withstoodresolutely the arguments I used to urge him to set himself free.He declared, in earnest terms, that he was fully bent on remainingwhere he was rather than seek to return to his former miserablegreatness, as he called it:  where the seeds of pride, ambition,avarice, and luxury might revive, take root, and again overwhelmhim.  "Let me remain, dear sir," he said, in conclusion - "let meremain in this blessed confinement, banished from the crimes oflife, rather than purchase a show of freedom at the expense of theliberty of my reason, and at the future happiness which I now havein my view, but should then, I fear, quickly lose sight of; for Iam but flesh; a man, a mere man; and have passions and affectionsas likely to possess and overthrow me as any man:  Oh, be not myfriend and tempter both together!"

　　If I was surprised before, I was quite dumb now, and stood silent,looking at him, and, indeed, admiring what I saw.  The struggle inhis soul was so great that, though the weather was extremely cold,it put him into a most violent heat; so I said a word or two, thatI would leave him to consider of it, and wait on him again, andthen I withdrew to my own apartment.

　　About two hours after I heard somebody at or near the door of myroom, and I was going to open the door, but he had opened it andcome in.  "My dear friend," says he, "you had almost overset me,but I am recovered.  Do not take it ill that I do not close withyour offer.  I assure you it is not for want of sense of thekindness of it in you; and I came to make the most sincereacknowledgment of it to you; but I hope I have got the victory overmyself." - "My lord," said I, "I hope you are fully satisfied thatyou do not resist the call of Heaven." - "Sir," said he, "if it hadbeen from Heaven, the same power would have influenced me to haveaccepted it; but I hope, and am fully satisfied, that it is fromHeaven that I decline it, and I have infinite satisfaction in theparting, that you shall leave me an honest man still, though not afree man."

　　I had nothing to do but to acquiesce, and make professions to himof my having no end in it but a sincere desire to serve him.  Heembraced me very passionately, and assured me he was sensible ofthat, and should always acknowledge it; and with that he offered mea very fine present of sables - too much, indeed, for me to acceptfrom a man in his circumstances, and I would have avoided them, buthe would not be refused.  The next morning I sent my servant to hislordship with a small present of tea, and two pieces of Chinadamask, and four little wedges of Japan gold, which did not allweigh above six ounces or thereabouts, but were far short of thevalue of his sables, which, when I came to England, I found worthnear two hundred pounds.  He accepted the tea, and one piece of thedamask, and one of the pieces of gold, which had a fine stamp uponit, of the Japan coinage, which I found he took for the rarity ofit, but would not take any more:  and he sent word by my servantthat he desired to speak with me.

　　When I came to him he told me I knew what had passed between us,and hoped I would not move him any more in that affair; but that,since I had made such a generous offer to him, he asked me if I hadkindness enough to offer the same to another person that he wouldname to me, in whom he had a great share of concern.  In a word, hetold me it was his only son; who, though I had not seen him, was inthe same condition with himself, and above two hundred miles fromhim, on the other side of the Oby; but that, if I consented, hewould send for him.

　　I made no hesitation, but told him I would do it.  I made someceremony in letting him understand that it was wholly on hisaccount; and that, seeing I could not prevail on him, I would showmy respect to him by my concern for his son.  He sent the next dayfor his son; and in about twenty days he came back with themessenger, bringing six or seven horses, loaded with very richfurs, which, in the whole, amounted to a very great value.  Hisservants brought the horses into the town, but left the young lordat a distance till night, when he came incognito into ourapartment, and his father presented him to me; and, in short, weconcerted the manner of our travelling, and everything proper forthe journey.

　　I had bought a considerable quantity of sables, black fox-skins,fine ermines, and such other furs as are very rich in that city, inexchange for some of the goods I had brought from China; inparticular for the cloves and nutmegs, of which I sold the greatestpart here, and the rest afterwards at Archangel, for a much betterprice than I could have got at London; and my partner, who wassensible of the profit, and whose business, more particularly thanmine, was merchandise, was mightily pleased with our stay, onaccount of the traffic we made here.

　　It was the beginning of June when I left this remote place.  Wewere now reduced to a very small caravan, having only thirty-twohorses and camels in all, which passed for mine, though my newguest was proprietor of eleven of them.  It was natural also that Ishould take more servants with me than I had before; and the younglord passed for my steward; what great man I passed for myself Iknow not, neither did it concern me to inquire.  We had here theworst and the largest desert to pass over that we met with in ourwhole journey; I call it the worst, because the way was very deepin some places, and very uneven in others; the best we had to sayfor it was, that we thought we had no troops of Tartars or robbersto fear, as they never came on this side of the river Oby, or atleast very seldom; but we found it otherwise.

　　My young lord had a faithful Siberian servant, who was perfectlyacquainted with the country, and led us by private roads, so thatwe avoided coming into the principal towns and cities upon thegreat road, such as Tumen, Soloy Kamaskoy, and several others;because the Muscovite garrisons which are kept there are verycurious and strict in their observation upon travellers, andsearching lest any of the banished persons of note should maketheir escape that way into Muscovy; but, by this means, as we werekept out of the cities, so our whole journey was a desert, and wewere obliged to encamp and lie in our tents, when we might have hadvery good accommodation in the cities on the way; this the younglord was so sensible of, that he would not allow us to lie abroadwhen we came to several cities on the way, but lay abroad himself,with his servant, in the woods, and met us always at the appointedplaces.

　　We had just entered Europe, having passed the river Kama, which inthese parts is the boundary between Europe and Asia, and the firstcity on the European side was called Soloy Kamaskoy, that is, thegreat city on the river Kama.  And here we thought to see someevident alteration in the people; but we were mistaken, for as wehad a vast desert to pass, which is near seven hundred miles longin some places, but not above two hundred miles over where wepassed it, so, till we came past that horrible place, we found verylittle difference between that country and Mogul Tartary.  Thepeople are mostly pagans; their houses and towns full of idols; andtheir way of living wholly barbarous, except in the cities andvillages near them, where they are Christians, as they callthemselves, of the Greek Church:  but have their religion mingledwith so many relics of superstition, that it is scarce to be knownin some places from mere sorcery and witchcraft.

　　In passing this forest (after all our dangers were, to ourimagination, escaped), I thought, indeed, we must have beenplundered and robbed, and perhaps murdered, by a troop of thieves:of what country they were I am yet at a loss to know; but they wereall on horseback, carried bows and arrows, and were at first aboutforty-five in number.  They came so near to us as to be within twomusket-shot, and, asking no questions, surrounded us with theirhorses, and looked very earnestly upon us twice; at length, theyplaced themselves just in our way; upon which we drew up in alittle line, before our camels, being not above sixteen men in all.Thus drawn up, we halted, and sent out the Siberian servant, whoattended his lord, to see who they were; his master was the morewilling to let him go, because he was not a little apprehensivethat they were a Siberian troop sent out after him.  The man cameup near them with a flag of truce, and called to them; but thoughhe spoke several of their languages, or dialects of languagesrather, he could not understand a word they said; however, aftersome signs to him not to come near them at his peril, the fellowcame back no wiser than he went; only that by their dress, he said,he believed them to be some Tartars of Kalmuck, or of theCircassian hordes, and that there must be more of them upon thegreat desert, though he never heard that any of them were seen sofar north before.

　　This was small comfort to us; however, we had no remedy:  there wason our left hand, at about a quarter of a mile distance, a littlegrove, and very near the road.  I immediately resolved we shouldadvance to those trees, and fortify ourselves as well as we couldthere; for, first, I considered that the trees would in a greatmeasure cover us from their arrows; and, in the next place, theycould not come to charge us in a body:  it was, indeed, my oldPortuguese pilot who proposed it, and who had this excellencyattending him, that he was always readiest and most apt to directand encourage us in cases of the most danger.  We advancedimmediately, with what speed we could, and gained that little wood;the Tartars, or thieves, for we knew not what to call them, keepingtheir stand, and not attempting to hinder us.  When we camethither, we found, to our great satisfaction, that it was a swampypiece of ground, and on the one side a very great spring of water,which, running out in a little brook, was a little farther joinedby another of the like size; and was, in short, the source of aconsiderable river, called afterwards the Wirtska; the trees whichgrew about this spring were not above two hundred, but very large,and stood pretty thick, so that as soon as we got in, we sawourselves perfectly safe from the enemy unless they attacked us onfoot.

　　While we stayed here waiting the motion of the enemy some hours,without perceiving that they made any movement, our Portuguese,with some help, cut several arms of trees half off, and laid themhanging across from one tree to another, and in a manner fenced usin.  About two hours before night they came down directly upon us;and though we had not perceived it, we found they had been joinedby some more, so that they were near fourscore horse; whereof,however, we fancied some were women.  They came on till they werewithin half-shot of our little wood, when we fired one musketwithout ball, and called to them in the Russian tongue to know whatthey wanted, and bade them keep off; but they came on with a doublefury up to the wood-side, not imagining we were so barricaded thatthey could not easily break in.  Our old pilot was our captain aswell as our engineer, and desired us not to fire upon them tillthey came within pistol-shot, that we might be sure to kill, andthat when we did fire we should be sure to take good aim; we badehim give the word of command, which he delayed so long that theywere some of them within two pikes' length of us when we let fly.We aimed so true that we killed fourteen of them, and woundedseveral others, as also several of their horses; for we had all ofus loaded our pieces with two or three bullets apiece at least.

　　They were terribly surprised with our fire, and retreatedimmediately about one hundred rods from us; in which time we loadedour pieces again, and seeing them keep that distance, we salliedout, and caught four or five of their horses, whose riders wesupposed were killed; and coming up to the dead, we judged theywere Tartars, but knew not how they came to make an excursion suchan unusual length.

　　About an hour after they again made a motion to attack us, and roderound our little wood to see where they might break in; but findingus always ready to face them, they went off again; and we resolvednot to stir for that night.

　　We slept little, but spent the most part of the night instrengthening our situation, and barricading the entrances into thewood, and keeping a strict watch.  We waited for daylight, and whenit came, it gave us a very unwelcome discovery indeed; for theenemy, who we thought were discouraged with the reception they metwith, were now greatly increased, and had set up eleven or twelvehuts or tents, as if they were resolved to besiege us; and thislittle camp they had pitched upon the open plain, about three-quarters of a mile from us.  I confess I now gave myself over forlost, and all that I had; the loss of my effects did not lie sonear me, though very considerable, as the thoughts of falling intothe hands of such barbarians at the latter end of my journey, afterso many difficulties and hazards as I had gone through, and even insight of our port, where we expected safety and deliverance.  As tomy partner, he was raging, and declared that to lose his goodswould be his ruin, and that he would rather die than be starved,and he was for fighting to the last drop.

　　The young lord, a most gallant youth, was for fighting to the lastalso; and my old pilot was of opinion that we were able to resistthem all in the situation we were then in.  Thus we spent the dayin debates of what we should do; but towards evening we found thatthe number of our enemies still increased, and we did not know butby the morning they might still be a greater number:  so I began toinquire of those people we had brought from Tobolski if there wereno private ways by which we might avoid them in the night, andperhaps retreat to some town, or get help to guard us over thedesert.  The young lord's Siberian servant told us, if we designedto avoid them, and not fight, he would engage to carry us off inthe night, to a way that went north, towards the river Petruz, bywhich he made no question but we might get away, and the Tartarsnever discover it; but, he said, his lord had told him he would notretreat, but would rather choose to fight.  I told him he mistookhis lord:  for that he was too wise a man to love fighting for thesake of it; that I knew he was brave enough by what he had showedalready; but that he knew better than to desire seventeen oreighteen men to fight five hundred, unless an unavoidable necessityforced them to it; and that if he thought it possible for us toescape in the night, we had nothing else to do but to attempt it.He answered, if his lordship gave him such orders, he would losehis life if he did not perform it; we soon brought his lord to givethat order, though privately, and we immediately prepared forputting it in practice.

　　And first, as soon as it began to be dark, we kindled a fire in ourlittle camp, which we kept burning, and prepared so as to make itburn all night, that the Tartars might conclude we were stillthere; but as soon as it was dark, and we could see the stars (forour guide would not stir before), having all our horses and camelsready loaded, we followed our new guide, who I soon found steeredhimself by the north star, the country being level for a long way.

　　After we had travelled two hours very hard, it began to be lighterstill; not that it was dark all night, but the moon began to rise,so that, in short, it was rather lighter than we wished it to be;but by six o'clock the next morning we had got above thirty miles,having almost spoiled our horses.  Here we found a Russian village,named Kermazinskoy, where we rested, and heard nothing of theKalmuck Tartars that day.  About two hours before night we set outagain, and travelled till eight the next morning, though not quiteso hard as before; and about seven o'clock we passed a littleriver, called Kirtza, and came to a good large town inhabited byRussians, called Ozomys; there we heard that several troops ofKalmucks had been abroad upon the desert, but that we were nowcompletely out of danger of them, which was to our greatsatisfaction.  Here we were obliged to get some fresh horses, andhaving need enough of rest, we stayed five days; and my partner andI agreed to give the honest Siberian who conducted us thither thevalue of ten pistoles.

　　In five days more we came to Veussima, upon the river Witzogda, andrunning into the Dwina:  we were there, very happily, near the endof our travels by land, that river being navigable, in seven days'passage, to Archangel.  From hence we came to Lawremskoy, the 3rdof July; and providing ourselves with two luggage boats, and abarge for our own convenience, we embarked the 7th, and arrived allsafe at Archangel the 18th; having been a year, five months, andthree days on the journey, including our stay of about eight monthsat Tobolski.

　　We were obliged to stay at this place six weeks for the arrival ofthe ships, and must have tarried longer, had not a Hamburgher comein above a month sooner than any of the English ships; when, aftersome consideration that the city of Hamburgh might happen to be asgood a market for our goods as London, we all took freight withhim; and, having put our goods on board, it was most natural for meto put my steward on board to take care of them; by which means myyoung lord had a sufficient opportunity to conceal himself, nevercoming on shore again all the time we stayed there; and this he didthat he might not be seen in the city, where some of the Moscowmerchants would certainly have seen and discovered him.

　　We then set sail from Archangel the 20th of August, the same year;and, after no extraordinary bad voyage, arrived safe in the Elbethe 18th of September.  Here my partner and I found a very goodsale for our goods, as well those of China as the sables, &c., ofSiberia:  and, dividing the produce, my share amounted to 3475pounds, 17s 3d., including about six hundred pounds' worth ofdiamonds, which I purchased at Bengal.

　　Here the young lord took his leave of us, and went up the Elbe, inorder to go to the court of Vienna, where he resolved to seekprotection and could correspond with those of his father's friendswho were left alive.  He did not part without testimonials ofgratitude for the service I had done him, and for my kindness tothe prince, his father.

　　To conclude:  having stayed near four months in Hamburgh, I camefrom thence by land to the Hague, where I embarked in the packet,and arrived in London the 10th of January 1705, having been absentfrom England ten years and nine months.  And here, resolving toharass myself no more, I am preparing for a longer journey than allthese, having lived seventy-two years a life of infinite variety,and learned sufficiently to know the value of retirement, and theblessing of ending our days in peace.

　　End