　　The Count of Monte Cristo

　　by Alexandre Dumas [Pere]

　　Chapter 1Marseilles -- The Arrival.

　　On the 24th of February, 1810, the look-out at Notre-Dame dela Garde signalled the three-master, the Pharaon fromSmyrna, Trieste, and Naples.

　　As usual, a pilot put off immediately, and rounding theChateau d'If, got on board the vessel between Cape Morgionand Rion island.

　　Immediately, and according to custom, the ramparts of FortSaint-Jean were covered with spectators; it is always anevent at Marseilles for a ship to come into port, especiallywhen this ship, like the Pharaon, has been built, rigged,and laden at the old Phocee docks, and belongs to an ownerof the city.

　　The ship drew on and had safely passed the strait, whichsome volcanic shock has made between the Calasareigne andJaros islands; had doubled Pomegue, and approached theharbor under topsails, jib, and spanker, but so slowly andsedately that the idlers, with that instinct which is theforerunner of evil, asked one another what misfortune couldhave happened on board. However, those experienced innavigation saw plainly that if any accident had occurred, itwas not to the vessel herself, for she bore down with allthe evidence of being skilfully handled, the anchora-cockbill, the jib-boom guys already eased off, andstanding by the side of the pilot, who was steering thePharaon towards the narrow entrance of the inner port, was ayoung man, who, with activity and vigilant eye, watchedevery motion of the ship, and repeated each direction of thepilot.

　　The vague disquietude which prevailed among the spectatorshad so much affected one of the crowd that he did not awaitthe arrival of the vessel in harbor, but jumping into asmall skiff, desired to be pulled alongside the Pharaon,which he reached as she rounded into La Reserve basin.

　　When the young man on board saw this person approach, heleft his station by the pilot, and, hat in hand, leaned overthe ship's bulwarks.

　　He was a fine, tall, slim young fellow of eighteen ortwenty, with black eyes, and hair as dark as a raven's wing;and his whole appearance bespoke that calmness andresolution peculiar to men accustomed from their cradle tocontend with danger.

　　"Ah, is it you, Dantes?" cried the man in the skiff. "What'sthe matter? and why have you such an air of sadness aboard?"

　　"A great misfortune, M. Morrel," replied the young man, --"a great misfortune, for me especially! Off Civita Vecchiawe lost our brave Captain Leclere."

　　"And the cargo?" inquired the owner, eagerly.

　　"Is all safe, M. Morrel; and I think you will be satisfiedon that head. But poor Captain Leclere -- "

　　"What happened to him?" asked the owner, with an air ofconsiderable resignation. "What happened to the worthycaptain?"

　　"He died."

　　"Fell into the sea?"

　　"No, sir, he died of brain-fever in dreadful agony." Thenturning to the crew, he said, "Bear a hand there, to take insail!"

　　All hands obeyed, and at once the eight or ten seamen whocomposed the crew, sprang to their respective stations atthe spanker brails and outhaul, topsail sheets and halyards,the jib downhaul, and the topsail clewlines and buntlines.The young sailor gave a look to see that his orders werepromptly and accurately obeyed, and then turned again to theowner.

　　"And how did this misfortune occur?" inquired the latter,resuming the interrupted conversation.

　　"Alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner. After a long talkwith the harbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatlydisturbed in mind. In twenty-four hours he was attacked by afever, and died three days afterwards. We performed theusual burial service, and he is at his rest, sewn up in hishammock with a thirty-six pound shot at his head and hisheels, off El Giglio island. We bring to his widow his swordand cross of honor. It was worth while, truly," added theyoung man with a melancholy smile, "to make war against theEnglish for ten years, and to die in his bed at last, likeeverybody else."

　　"Why, you see, Edmond," replied the owner, who appeared morecomforted at every moment, "we are all mortal, and the oldmust make way for the young. If not, why, there would be nopromotion; and since you assure me that the cargo -- "

　　"Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; andI advise you not to take 25,000 francs for the profits ofthe voyage."

　　Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the youngman shouted: "Stand by there to lower the topsails and jib;brail up the spanker!"

　　The order was executed as promptly as it would have been onboard a man-of-war.

　　"Let go -- and clue up!" At this last command all the sailswere lowered, and the vessel moved almost imperceptiblyonwards.

　　"Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel," said Dantes,observing the owner's impatience, "here is your supercargo,M. Danglars, coming out of his cabin, who will furnish youwith every particular. As for me, I must look after theanchoring, and dress the ship in mourning."

　　The owner did not wait for a second invitation. He seized arope which Dantes flung to him, and with an activity thatwould have done credit to a sailor, climbed up the side ofthe ship, while the young man, going to his task, left theconversation to Danglars, who now came towards the owner. Hewas a man of twenty-five or twenty-six years of age, ofunprepossessing countenance, obsequious to his superiors,insolent to his subordinates; and this, in addition to hisposition as responsible agent on board, which is alwaysobnoxious to the sailors, made him as much disliked by thecrew as Edmond Dantes was beloved by them.

　　"Well, M. Morrel," said Danglars, "you have heard of themisfortune that has befallen us?"

　　"Yes -- yes: poor Captain Leclere! He was a brave and anhonest man."

　　"And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long andhonorable service, as became a man charged with theinterests of a house so important as that of Morrel & Son,"replied Danglars.

　　"But," replied the owner, glancing after Dantes, who waswatching the anchoring of his vessel, "it seems to me that asailor needs not be so old as you say, Danglars, tounderstand his business, for our friend Edmond seems tounderstand it thoroughly, and not to require instructionfrom any one."

　　"Yes," said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming withhate. "Yes, he is young, and youth is invariablyself-confident. Scarcely was the captain's breath out of hisbody when he assumed the command without consulting any one,and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the Island ofElba, instead of making for Marseilles direct."

　　"As to taking command of the vessel," replied Morrel, "thatwas his duty as captain's mate; as to losing a day and ahalf off the Island of Elba, he was wrong, unless the vesselneeded repairs."

　　"The vessel was in as good condition as I am, and as, I hopeyou are, M. Morrel, and this day and a half was lost frompure whim, for the pleasure of going ashore, and nothingelse."

　　"Dantes," said the shipowner, turning towards the young man,"come this way!"

　　"In a moment, sir," answered Dantes, "and I'm with you."Then calling to the crew, he said -- "Let go!"

　　The anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattlingthrough the port-hole. Dantes continued at his post in spiteof the presence of the pilot, until this manoeuvre wascompleted, and then he added, "Half-mast the colors, andsquare the yards!"

　　"You see," said Danglars, "he fancies himself captainalready, upon my word."

　　"And so, in fact, he is," said the owner.

　　"Except your signature and your partner's, M. Morrel."

　　"And why should he not have this?" asked the owner; "he isyoung, it is true, but he seems to me a thorough seaman, andof full experience."

　　A cloud passed over Danglars' brow. "Your pardon, M.Morrel," said Dantes, approaching, "the vessel now rides atanchor, and I am at your service. You hailed me, I think?"

　　Danglars retreated a step or two. "I wished to inquire whyyou stopped at the Island of Elba?"

　　"I do not know, sir; it was to fulfil the last instructionsof Captain Leclere, who, when dying, gave me a packet forMarshal Bertrand."

　　"Then did you see him, Edmond?"

　　"Who?"

　　"The marshal."

　　"Yes."

　　Morrel looked around him, and then, drawing Dantes on oneside, he said suddenly -- "And how is the emperor?"

　　"Very well, as far as I could judge from the sight of him."

　　"You saw the emperor, then?"

　　"He entered the marshal's apartment while I was there."

　　"And you spoke to him?"

　　"Why, it was he who spoke to me, sir," said Dantes, with asmile.

　　"And what did he say to you?"

　　"Asked me questions about the vessel, the time she leftMarseilles, the course she had taken, and what was hercargo. I believe, if she had not been laden, and I had beenher master, he would have bought her. But I told him I wasonly mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel &Son. `Ah, yes,' he said, `I know them. The Morrels have beenshipowners from father to son; and there was a Morrel whoserved in the same regiment with me when I was in garrisonat Valence.'"

　　"Pardieu, and that is true!" cried the owner, greatlydelighted. "And that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who wasafterwards a captain. Dantes, you must tell my uncle thatthe emperor remembered him, and you will see it will bringtears into the old soldier's eyes. Come, come," continuedhe, patting Edmond's shoulder kindly, "you did very right,Dantes, to follow Captain Leclere's instructions, and touchat Elba, although if it were known that you had conveyed apacket to the marshal, and had conversed with the emperor,it might bring you into trouble."

　　"How could that bring me into trouble, sir?" asked Dantes;"for I did not even know of what I was the bearer; and theemperor merely made such inquiries as he would of the firstcomer. But, pardon me, here are the health officers and thecustoms inspectors coming alongside." And the young man wentto the gangway. As he departed, Danglars approached, andsaid, --

　　"Well, it appears that he has given you satisfactory reasonsfor his landing at Porto-Ferrajo?"

　　"Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars."

　　"Well, so much the better," said the supercargo; "for it isnot pleasant to think that a comrade has not done his duty."

　　"Dantes has done his," replied the owner, "and that is notsaying much. It was Captain Leclere who gave orders for thisdelay."

　　"Talking of Captain Leclere, has not Dantes given you aletter from him?"

　　"To me? -- no -- was there one?"

　　"I believe that, besides the packet, Captain Leclereconfided a letter to his care."

　　"Of what packet are you speaking, Danglars?"

　　"Why, that which Dantes left at Porto-Ferrajo."

　　"How do you know he had a packet to leave at Porto-Ferrajo?"

　　Danglars turned very red.

　　"I was passing close to the door of the captain's cabin,which was half open, and I saw him give the packet andletter to Dantes."

　　"He did not speak to me of it," replied the shipowner; "butif there be any letter he will give it to me."

　　Danglars reflected for a moment. "Then, M. Morrel, I beg ofyou," said he, "not to say a word to Dantes on the subject.I may have been mistaken."

　　At this moment the young man returned; Danglars withdrew.

　　"Well, my dear Dantes, are you now free?" inquired theowner.

　　"Yes, sir."

　　"You have not been long detained."

　　"No. I gave the custom-house officers a copy of our bill oflading; and as to the other papers, they sent a man off withthe pilot, to whom I gave them."

　　"Then you have nothing more to do here?"

　　"No -- everything is all right now."

　　"Then you can come and dine with me?"

　　"I really must ask you to excuse me, M. Morrel. My firstvisit is due to my father, though I am not the less gratefulfor the honor you have done me."

　　"Right, Dantes, quite right. I always knew you were a goodson."

　　"And," inquired Dantes, with some hesitation, "do you knowhow my father is?"

　　"Well, I believe, my dear Edmond, though I have not seen himlately."

　　"Yes, he likes to keep himself shut up in his little room."

　　"That proves, at least, that he has wanted for nothingduring your absence."

　　Dantes smiled. "My father is proud, sir, and if he had not ameal left, I doubt if he would have asked anything fromanyone, except from Heaven."

　　"Well, then, after this first visit has been made we shallcount on you."

　　"I must again excuse myself, M. Morrel, for after this firstvisit has been paid I have another which I am most anxiousto pay."

　　"True, Dantes, I forgot that there was at the Catalans someone who expects you no less impatiently than your father --the lovely Mercedes."

　　Dantes blushed.

　　"Ah, ha," said the shipowner, "I am not in the leastsurprised, for she has been to me three times, inquiring ifthere were any news of the Pharaon. Peste, Edmond, you havea very handsome mistress!"

　　"She is not my mistress," replied the young sailor, gravely;"she is my betrothed."

　　"Sometimes one and the same thing," said Morrel, with asmile.

　　"Not with us, sir," replied Dantes.

　　"Well, well, my dear Edmond," continued the owner, "don'tlet me detain you. You have managed my affairs so well thatI ought to allow you all the time you require for your own.Do you want any money?"

　　"No, sir; I have all my pay to take -- nearly three months'wages."

　　"You are a careful fellow, Edmond."

　　"Say I have a poor father, sir."

　　"Yes, yes, I know how good a son you are, so now hasten awayto see your father. I have a son too, and I should be verywroth with those who detained him from me after a threemonths' voyage."

　　"Then I have your leave, sir?"

　　"Yes, if you have nothing more to say to me."

　　"Nothing."

　　"Captain Leclere did not, before he died, give you a letterfor me?"

　　"He was unable to write, sir. But that reminds me that Imust ask your leave of absence for some days."

　　"To get married?"

　　"Yes, first, and then to go to Paris."

　　"Very good; have what time you require, Dantes. It will takequite six weeks to unload the cargo, and we cannot get youready for sea until three months after that; only be backagain in three months, for the Pharaon," added the owner,patting the young sailor on the back, "cannot sail withouther captain."

　　"Without her captain!" cried Dantes, his eyes sparkling withanimation; "pray mind what you say, for you are touching onthe most secret wishes of my heart. Is it really yourintention to make me captain of the Pharaon?"

　　"If I were sole owner we'd shake hands on it now, my dearDantes, and call it settled; but I have a partner, and youknow the Italian proverb -- Chi ha compagno ha padrone --`He who has a partner has a master.' But the thing is atleast half done, as you have one out of two votes. Rely onme to procure you the other; I will do my best."

　　"Ah, M. Morrel," exclaimed the young seaman, with tears inhis eyes, and grasping the owner's hand, "M. Morrel, I thankyou in the name of my father and of Mercedes."

　　"That's all right, Edmond. There's a providence that watchesover the deserving. Go to your father: go and see Mercedes,and afterwards come to me."

　　"Shall I row you ashore?"

　　"No, thank you; I shall remain and look over the accountswith Danglars. Have you been satisfied with him thisvoyage?"

　　"That is according to the sense you attach to the question,sir. Do you mean is he a good comrade? No, for I think henever liked me since the day when I was silly enough, aftera little quarrel we had, to propose to him to stop for tenminutes at the island of Monte Cristo to settle the dispute-- a proposition which I was wrong to suggest, and he quiteright to refuse. If you mean as responsible agent when youask me the question, I believe there is nothing to sayagainst him, and that you will be content with the way inwhich he has performed his duty."

　　"But tell me, Dantes, if you had command of the Pharaonshould you be glad to see Danglars remain?"

　　"Captain or mate, M. Morrel, I shall always have thegreatest respect for those who possess the owners'confidence."

　　"That's right, that's right, Dantes! I see you are athoroughly good fellow, and will detain you no longer. Go,for I see how impatient you are."

　　"Then I have leave?"

　　"Go, I tell you."

　　"May I have the use of your skiff?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"Then, for the present, M. Morrel, farewell, and a thousandthanks!"

　　"I hope soon to see you again, my dear Edmond. Good luck toyou."

　　The young sailor jumped into the skiff, and sat down in thestern sheets, with the order that he be put ashore at LaCanebiere. The two oarsmen bent to their work, and thelittle boat glided away as rapidly as possible in the midstof the thousand vessels which choke up the narrow way whichleads between the two rows of ships from the mouth of theharbor to the Quai d'Orleans.

　　The shipowner, smiling, followed him with his eyes until hesaw him spring out on the quay and disappear in the midst ofthe throng, which from five o'clock in the morning untilnine o'clock at night, swarms in the famous street of LaCanebiere, -- a street of which the modern Phocaeans are soproud that they say with all the gravity in the world, andwith that accent which gives so much character to what issaid, "If Paris had La Canebiere, Paris would be a secondMarseilles." On turning round the owner saw Danglars behindhim, apparently awaiting orders, but in reality alsowatching the young sailor, -- but there was a greatdifference in the expression of the two men who thusfollowed the movements of Edmond Dantes.

　　Chapter 2Father and Son.

　　We will leave Danglars struggling with the demon of hatred,and endeavoring to insinuate in the ear of the shipownersome evil suspicions against his comrade, and follow Dantes,who, after having traversed La Canebiere, took the Rue deNoailles, and entering a small house, on the left of theAllees de Meillan, rapidly ascended four flights of a darkstaircase, holding the baluster with one hand, while withthe other he repressed the beatings of his heart, and pausedbefore a half-open door, from which he could see the wholeof a small room.

　　This room was occupied by Dantes' father. The news of thearrival of the Pharaon had not yet reached the old man, who,mounted on a chair, was amusing himself by training withtrembling hand the nasturtiums and sprays of clematis thatclambered over the trellis at his window. Suddenly, he feltan arm thrown around his body, and a well-known voice behindhim exclaimed, "Father -- dear father!"

　　The old man uttered a cry, and turned round; then, seeinghis son, he fell into his arms, pale and trembling.

　　"What ails you, my dearest father? Are you ill?" inquiredthe young man, much alarmed.

　　"No, no, my dear Edmond -- my boy -- my son! -- no; but Idid not expect you; and joy, the surprise of seeing you sosuddenly -- Ah, I feel as if I were going to die."

　　"Come, come, cheer up, my dear father! 'Tis I -- really I!They say joy never hurts, and so I came to you without anywarning. Come now, do smile, instead of looking at me sosolemnly. Here I am back again, and we are going to behappy."

　　"Yes, yes, my boy, so we will -- so we will," replied theold man; "but how shall we be happy? Shall you never leaveme again? Come, tell me all the good fortune that hasbefallen you."

　　"God forgive me," said the young man, "for rejoicing athappiness derived from the misery of others, but, Heavenknows, I did not seek this good fortune; it has happened,and I really cannot pretend to lament it. The good CaptainLeclere is dead, father, and it is probable that, with theaid of M. Morrel, I shall have his place. Do you understand,father? Only imagine me a captain at twenty, with a hundredlouis pay, and a share in the profits! Is this not more thana poor sailor like me could have hoped for?"

　　"Yes, my dear boy," replied the old man, "it is veryfortunate."

　　"Well, then, with the first money I touch, I mean you tohave a small house, with a garden in which to plantclematis, nasturtiums, and honeysuckle. But what ails you,father? Are you not well?"

　　"'Tis nothing, nothing; it will soon pass away" -- and as hesaid so the old man's strength failed him, and he fellbackwards.

　　"Come, come," said the young man, "a glass of wine, father,will revive you. Where do you keep your wine?"

　　"No, no; thanks. You need not look for it; I do not wantit," said the old man.

　　"Yes, yes, father, tell me where it is," and he opened twoor three cupboards.

　　"It is no use," said the old man, "there is no wine."

　　"What, no wine?" said Dantes, turning pale, and lookingalternately at the hollow cheeks of the old man and theempty cupboards. "What, no wine? Have you wanted money,father?"

　　"I want nothing now that I have you," said the old man.

　　"Yet," stammered Dantes, wiping the perspiration from hisbrow, -- "yet I gave you two hundred francs when I left,three months ago."

　　"Yes, yes, Edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that timea little debt to our neighbor, Caderousse. He reminded me ofit, telling me if I did not pay for you, he would be paid byM. Morrel; and so, you see, lest he might do you an injury"--

　　"Well?"

　　"Why, I paid him."

　　"But," cried Dantes, "it was a hundred and forty francs Iowed Caderousse."

　　"Yes," stammered the old man.

　　"And you paid him out of the two hundred francs I left you?"

　　The old man nodded.

　　"So that you have lived for three months on sixty francs,"muttered Edmond.

　　"You know how little I require," said the old man.

　　"Heaven pardon me," cried Edmond, falling on his kneesbefore his father.

　　"What are you doing?"

　　"You have wounded me to the heart."

　　"Never mind it, for I see you once more," said the old man;"and now it's all over -- everything is all right again."

　　"Yes, here I am," said the young man, "with a promisingfuture and a little money. Here, father, here!" he said,"take this -- take it, and send for something immediately."And he emptied his pockets on the table, the contentsconsisting of a dozen gold pieces, five or six five-francpieces, and some smaller coin. The countenance of old Dantesbrightened.

　　"Whom does this belong to?" he inquired.

　　"To me, to you, to us! Take it; buy some provisions; behappy, and to-morrow we shall have more."

　　"Gently, gently," said the old man, with a smile; "and byyour leave I will use your purse moderately, for they wouldsay, if they saw me buy too many things at a time, that Ihad been obliged to await your return, in order to be ableto purchase them."

　　"Do as you please; but, first of all, pray have a servant,father. I will not have you left alone so long. I have somesmuggled coffee and most capital tobacco, in a small chestin the hold, which you shall have to-morrow. But, hush, herecomes somebody."

　　"'Tis Caderousse, who has heard of your arrival, and nodoubt comes to congratulate you on your fortunate return."

　　"Ah, lips that say one thing, while the heart thinksanother," murmured Edmond. "But, never mind, he is aneighbor who has done us a service on a time, so he'swelcome."

　　As Edmond paused, the black and bearded head of Caderousseappeared at the door. He was a man of twenty-five or six,and held a piece of cloth, which, being a tailor, he wasabout to make into a coat-lining.

　　"What, is it you, Edmond, back again?" said he, with a broadMarseillaise accent, and a grin that displayed hisivory-white teeth.

　　"Yes, as you see, neighbor Caderousse; and ready to beagreeable to you in any and every way," replied Dantes, butill-concealing his coldness under this cloak of civility.

　　"Thanks -- thanks; but, fortunately, I do not want foranything; and it chances that at times there are others whohave need of me." Dantes made a gesture. "I do not allude toyou, my boy. No! -- no! I lent you money, and you returnedit; that's like good neighbors, and we are quits."

　　"We are never quits with those who oblige us," was Dantes'reply; "for when we do not owe them money, we owe themgratitude."

　　"What's the use of mentioning that? What is done is done.Let us talk of your happy return, my boy. I had gone on thequay to match a piece of mulberry cloth, when I met friendDanglars. `You at Marseilles?' -- `Yes,' says he.

　　"`I thought you were at Smyrna.' -- `I was; but am now backagain.'

　　"`And where is the dear boy, our little Edmond?'

　　"`Why, with his father, no doubt,' replied Danglars. And soI came," added Caderousse, "as fast as I could to have thepleasure of shaking hands with a friend."

　　"Worthy Caderousse!" said the old man, "he is so muchattached to us."

　　"Yes, to be sure I am. I love and esteem you, because honestfolks are so rare. But it seems you have come back rich, myboy," continued the tailor, looking askance at the handfulof gold and silver which Dantes had thrown on the table.

　　The young man remarked the greedy glance which shone in thedark eyes of his neighbor. "Eh," he said, negligently. "thismoney is not mine. I was expressing to my father my fearsthat he had wanted many things in my absence, and toconvince me he emptied his purse on the table. Come, father"added Dantes, "put this money back in your box -- unlessneighbor Caderousse wants anything, and in that case it isat his service."

　　"No, my boy, no," said Caderousse. "I am not in any want,thank God, my living is suited to my means. Keep your money-- keep it, I say; -- one never has too much; -- but, at thesame time, my boy, I am as much obliged by your offer as ifI took advantage of it."

　　"It was offered with good will," said Dantes.

　　"No doubt, my boy; no doubt. Well, you stand well with M.Morrel I hear, -- you insinuating dog, you!"

　　"M. Morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me," repliedDantes.

　　"Then you were wrong to refuse to dine with him."

　　"What, did you refuse to dine with him?" said old Dantes;"and did he invite you to dine?"

　　"Yes, my dear father," replied Edmond, smiling at hisfather's astonishment at the excessive honor paid to hisson.

　　"And why did you refuse, my son?" inquired the old man.

　　"That I might the sooner see you again, my dear father,"replied the young man. "I was most anxious to see you."

　　"But it must have vexed M. Morrel, good, worthy man," saidCaderousse. "And when you are looking forward to be captain,it was wrong to annoy the owner."

　　"But I explained to him the cause of my refusal," repliedDantes, "and I hope he fully understood it."

　　"Yes, but to be captain one must do a little flattery toone's patrons."

　　"I hope to be captain without that," said Dantes.

　　"So much the better -- so much the better! Nothing will givegreater pleasure to all your old friends; and I know onedown there behind the Saint Nicolas citadel who will not besorry to hear it."

　　"Mercedes?" said the old man.

　　"Yes, my dear father, and with your permission, now I haveseen you, and know you are well and have all you require, Iwill ask your consent to go and pay a visit to theCatalans."

　　"Go, my dear boy," said old Dantes: "and heaven bless you inyour wife, as it has blessed me in my son!"

　　"His wife!" said Caderousse; "why, how fast you go on,father Dantes; she is not his wife yet, as it seems to me."

　　"So, but according to all probability she soon will be,"replied Edmond.

　　"Yes -- yes," said Caderousse; "but you were right to returnas soon as possible, my boy."

　　"And why?"

　　"Because Mercedes is a very fine girl, and fine girls neverlack followers; she particularly has them by dozens."

　　"Really?" answered Edmond, with a smile which had in ittraces of slight uneasiness.

　　"Ah, yes," continued Caderousse, "and capital offers, too;but you know, you will be captain, and who could refuse youthen?"

　　"Meaning to say," replied Dantes, with a smile which butill-concealed his trouble, "that if I were not a captain" --

　　"Eh -- eh!" said Caderousse, shaking his head.

　　"Come, come," said the sailor, "I have a better opinion thanyou of women in general, and of Mercedes in particular; andI am certain that, captain or not, she will remain everfaithful to me."

　　"So much the better -- so much the better," said Caderousse."When one is going to be married, there is nothing likeimplicit confidence; but never mind that, my boy, -- go andannounce your arrival, and let her know all your hopes andprospects."

　　"I will go directly," was Edmond's reply; and, embracing hisfather, and nodding to Caderousse, he left the apartment.

　　Caderousse lingered for a moment, then taking leave of oldDantes, he went downstairs to rejoin Danglars, who awaitedhim at the corner of the Rue Senac.

　　"Well," said Danglars, "did you see him?"

　　"I have just left him," answered Caderousse.

　　"Did he allude to his hope of being captain?"

　　"He spoke of it as a thing already decided."

　　"Indeed!" said Danglars, "he is in too much hurry, itappears to me."

　　"Why, it seems M. Morrel has promised him the thing."

　　"So that he is quite elated about it?"

　　"Why, yes, he is actually insolent over the matter -- hasalready offered me his patronage, as if he were a grandpersonage, and proffered me a loan of money, as though hewere a banker."

　　"Which you refused?"

　　"Most assuredly; although I might easily have accepted it,for it was I who put into his hands the first silver he everearned; but now M. Dantes has no longer any occasion forassistance -- he is about to become a captain."

　　"Pooh!" said Danglars, "he is not one yet."

　　"Ma foi, it will be as well if he is not," answeredCaderousse; "for if he should be, there will be really nospeaking to him."

　　"If we choose," replied Danglars, "he will remain what heis; and perhaps become even less than he is."

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"Nothing -- I was speaking to myself. And is he still inlove with the Catalane?"

　　"Over head and ears; but, unless I am much mistaken, therewill be a storm in that quarter."

　　"Explain yourself."

　　"Why should I?"

　　"It is more important than you think, perhaps. You do notlike Dantes?"

　　"I never like upstarts."

　　"Then tell me all you know about the Catalane."

　　"I know nothing for certain; only I have seen things whichinduce me to believe, as I told you, that the future captainwill find some annoyance in the vicinity of the VieillesInfirmeries."

　　"What have you seen? -- come, tell me!"

　　"Well, every time I have seen Mercedes come into the cityshe has been accompanied by a tall, strapping, black-eyedCatalan, with a red complexion, brown skin, and fierce air,whom she calls cousin."

　　"Really; and you think this cousin pays her attentions?"

　　"I only suppose so. What else can a strapping chap oftwenty-one mean with a fine wench of seventeen?"

　　"And you say that Dantes has gone to the Catalans?"

　　"He went before I came down."

　　"Let us go the same way; we will stop at La Reserve, and wecan drink a glass of La Malgue, whilst we wait for news."

　　"Come along," said Caderousse; "but you pay the score."

　　"Of course," replied Danglars; and going quickly to thedesignated place, they called for a bottle of wine, and twoglasses.

　　Pere Pamphile had seen Dantes pass not ten minutes before;and assured that he was at the Catalans, they sat down underthe budding foliage of the planes and sycamores, in thebranches of which the birds were singing their welcome toone of the first days of spring.

　　Chapter 3The Catalans.

　　Beyond a bare, weather-worn wall, about a hundred paces fromthe spot where the two friends sat looking and listening asthey drank their wine, was the village of the Catalans. Longago this mysterious colony quitted Spain, and settled on thetongue of land on which it is to this day. Whence it came noone knew, and it spoke an unknown tongue. One of its chiefs,who understood Provencal, begged the commune of Marseillesto give them this bare and barren promontory, where, likethe sailors of old, they had run their boats ashore. Therequest was granted; and three months afterwards, around thetwelve or fifteen small vessels which had brought thesegypsies of the sea, a small village sprang up. This village,constructed in a singular and picturesque manner, halfMoorish, half Spanish, still remains, and is inhabited bydescendants of the first comers, who speak the language oftheir fathers. For three or four centuries they haveremained upon this small promontory, on which they hadsettled like a flight of seabirds, without mixing with theMarseillaise population, intermarrying, and preserving theiroriginal customs and the costume of their mother-country asthey have preserved its language.

　　Our readers will follow us along the only street of thislittle village, and enter with us one of the houses, whichis sunburned to the beautiful dead-leaf color peculiar tothe buildings of the country, and within coated withwhitewash, like a Spanish posada. A young and beautifulgirl, with hair as black as jet, her eyes as velvety as thegazelle's, was leaning with her back against the wainscot,rubbing in her slender delicately moulded fingers a bunch ofheath blossoms, the flowers of which she was picking off andstrewing on the floor; her arms, bare to the elbow, brown,and modelled after those of the Arlesian Venus, moved with akind of restless impatience, and she tapped the earth withher arched and supple foot, so as to display the pure andfull shape of her well-turned leg, in its red cotton, grayand blue clocked, stocking. At three paces from her, seatedin a chair which he balanced on two legs, leaning his elbowon an old worm-eaten table, was a tall young man of twenty,or two-and-twenty, who was looking at her with an air inwhich vexation and uneasiness were mingled. He questionedher with his eyes, but the firm and steady gaze of the younggirl controlled his look.

　　"You see, Mercedes," said the young man, "here is Eastercome round again; tell me, is this the moment for awedding?"

　　"I have answered you a hundred times, Fernand, and reallyyou must be very stupid to ask me again."

　　"Well, repeat it, -- repeat it, I beg of you, that I may atlast believe it! Tell me for the hundredth time that yourefuse my love, which had your mother's sanction. Make meunderstand once for all that you are trifling with myhappiness, that my life or death are nothing to you. Ah, tohave dreamed for ten years of being your husband, Mercedes,and to lose that hope, which was the only stay of myexistence!"

　　"At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope,Fernand," replied Mercedes; "you cannot reproach me with theslightest coquetry. I have always said to you, `I love youas a brother; but do not ask from me more than sisterlyaffection, for my heart is another's.' Is not this true,Fernand?"

　　"Yes, that is very true, Mercedes," replied the young man,"Yes, you have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forgetthat it is among the Catalans a sacred law to intermarry?"

　　"You mistake, Fernand; it is not a law, but merely a custom,and, I pray of you, do not cite this custom in your favor.You are included in the conscription, Fernand, and are onlyat liberty on sufferance, liable at any moment to be calledupon to take up arms. Once a soldier, what would you do withme, a poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune, with nothingbut a half-ruined hut and a few ragged nets, the miserableinheritance left by my father to my mother, and by my motherto me? She has been dead a year, and you know, Fernand, Ihave subsisted almost entirely on public charity. Sometimesyou pretend I am useful to you, and that is an excuse toshare with me the produce of your fishing, and I accept it,Fernand, because you are the son of my father's brother,because we were brought up together, and still more becauseit would give you so much pain if I refuse. But I feel verydeeply that this fish which I go and sell, and with theproduce of which I buy the flax I spin, -- I feel verykeenly, Fernand, that this is charity."

　　"And if it were, Mercedes, poor and lone as you are, yousuit me as well as the daughter of the first shipowner orthe richest banker of Marseilles! What do such as we desirebut a good wife and careful housekeeper, and where can Ilook for these better than in you?"

　　"Fernand," answered Mercedes, shaking her head, "a womanbecomes a bad manager, and who shall say she will remain anhonest woman, when she loves another man better than herhusband? Rest content with my friendship, for I say oncemore that is all I can promise, and I will promise no morethan I can bestow."

　　"I understand," replied Fernand, "you can endure your ownwretchedness patiently, but you are afraid to share mine.Well, Mercedes, beloved by you, I would tempt fortune; youwould bring me good luck, and I should become rich. I couldextend my occupation as a fisherman, might get a place asclerk in a warehouse, and become in time a dealer myself."

　　"You could do no such thing, Fernand; you are a soldier, andif you remain at the Catalans it is because there is no war;so remain a fisherman, and contented with my friendship, asI cannot give you more."

　　"Well, I will do better, Mercedes. I will be a sailor;instead of the costume of our fathers, which you despise, Iwill wear a varnished hat, a striped shirt, and a bluejacket, with an anchor on the buttons. Would not that dressplease you?"

　　"What do you mean?" asked Mercedes, with an angry glance, --"what do you mean? I do not understand you?"

　　"I mean, Mercedes, that you are thus harsh and cruel withme, because you are expecting some one who is thus attired;but perhaps he whom you await is inconstant, or if he isnot, the sea is so to him."

　　"Fernand," cried Mercedes, "I believed you weregood-hearted, and I was mistaken! Fernand, you are wicked tocall to your aid jealousy and the anger of God! Yes, I willnot deny it, I do await, and I do love him of whom youspeak; and, if he does not return, instead of accusing himof the inconstancy which you insinuate, I will tell you thathe died loving me and me only." The young girl made agesture of rage. "I understand you, Fernand; you would berevenged on him because I do not love you; you would crossyour Catalan knife with his dirk. What end would thatanswer? To lose you my friendship if he were conquered, andsee that friendship changed into hate if you were victor.Believe me, to seek a quarrel with a man is a bad method ofpleasing the woman who loves that man. No, Fernand, you willnot thus give way to evil thoughts. Unable to have me foryour wife, you will content yourself with having me for yourfriend and sister; and besides," she added, her eyestroubled and moistened with tears, "wait, wait, Fernand; yousaid just now that the sea was treacherous, and he has beengone four months, and during these four months there havebeen some terrible storms."

　　Fernand made no reply, nor did he attempt to check the tearswhich flowed down the cheeks of Mercedes, although for eachof these tears he would have shed his heart's blood; butthese tears flowed for another. He arose, paced a while upand down the hut, and then, suddenly stopping beforeMercedes, with his eyes glowing and his hands clinched, --"Say, Mercedes," he said, "once for all, is this your finaldetermination?"

　　"I love Edmond Dantes," the young girl calmly replied, "andnone but Edmond shall ever be my husband."

　　"And you will always love him?"

　　"As long as I live."

　　Fernand let fall his head like a defeated man, heaved a sighthat was like a groan, and then suddenly looking her full inthe face, with clinched teeth and expanded nostrils, said,-- "But if he is dead" --

　　"If he is dead, I shall die too."

　　"If he has forgotten you" --

　　"Mercedes!" called a joyous voice from without, --"Mercedes!"

　　"Ah," exclaimed the young girl, blushing with delight, andfairly leaping in excess of love, "you see he has notforgotten me, for here he is!" And rushing towards the door,she opened it, saying, "Here, Edmond, here I am!"

　　Fernand, pale and trembling, drew back, like a traveller atthe sight of a serpent, and fell into a chair beside him.Edmond and Mercedes were clasped in each other's arms. Theburning Marseilles sun, which shot into the room through theopen door, covered them with a flood of light. At first theysaw nothing around them. Their intense happiness isolatedthem from all the rest of the world, and they only spoke inbroken words, which are the tokens of a joy so extreme thatthey seem rather the expression of sorrow. Suddenly Edmondsaw the gloomy, pale, and threatening countenance ofFernand, as it was defined in the shadow. By a movement forwhich he could scarcely account to himself, the youngCatalan placed his hand on the knife at his belt.

　　"Ah, your pardon," said Dantes, frowning in his turn; "I didnot perceive that there were three of us." Then, turning toMercedes, he inquired, "Who is this gentleman?"

　　"One who will be your best friend, Dantes, for he is myfriend, my cousin, my brother; it is Fernand -- the manwhom, after you, Edmond, I love the best in the world. Doyou not remember him?"

　　"Yes!" said Dantes, and without relinquishing Mercedes handclasped in one of his own, he extended the other to theCatalan with a cordial air. But Fernand, instead ofresponding to this amiable gesture, remained mute andtrembling. Edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly at theagitated and embarrassed Mercedes, and then again on thegloomy and menacing Fernand. This look told him all, and hisanger waxed hot.

　　"I did not know, when I came with such haste to you, that Iwas to meet an enemy here."

　　"An enemy!" cried Mercedes, with an angry look at hercousin. "An enemy in my house, do you say, Edmond! If Ibelieved that, I would place my arm under yours and go withyou to Marseilles, leaving the house to return to it nomore."

　　Fernand's eye darted lightning. "And should any misfortuneoccur to you, dear Edmond," she continued with the samecalmness which proved to Fernand that the young girl hadread the very innermost depths of his sinister thought, "ifmisfortune should occur to you, I would ascend the highestpoint of the Cape de Morgion and cast myself headlong fromit."

　　Fernand became deadly pale. "But you are deceived, Edmond,"she continued. "You have no enemy here -- there is no onebut Fernand, my brother, who will grasp your hand as adevoted friend."

　　And at these words the young girl fixed her imperious lookon the Catalan, who, as if fascinated by it, came slowlytowards Edmond, and offered him his hand. His hatred, like apowerless though furious wave, was broken against the strongascendancy which Mercedes exercised over him. Scarcely,however, had he touched Edmond's hand than he felt he haddone all he could do, and rushed hastily out of the house.

　　"Oh," he exclaimed, running furiously and tearing his hair-- "Oh, who will deliver me from this man? Wretched --wretched that I am!"

　　"Hallo, Catalan! Hallo, Fernand! where are you running to?"exclaimed a voice.

　　The young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, andperceived Caderousse sitting at table with Danglars, underan arbor.

　　"Well", said Caderousse, "why don't you come? Are you reallyin such a hurry that you have no time to pass the time ofday with your friends?"

　　"Particularly when they have still a full bottle beforethem," added Danglars. Fernand looked at them both with astupefied air, but did not say a word.

　　"He seems besotted," said Danglars, pushing Caderousse withhis knee. "Are we mistaken, and is Dantes triumphant inspite of all we have believed?"

　　"Why, we must inquire into that," was Caderousse's reply;and turning towards the young man, said, "Well, Catalan,can't you make up your mind?"

　　Fernand wiped away the perspiration steaming from his brow,and slowly entered the arbor, whose shade seemed to restoresomewhat of calmness to his senses, and whose coolnesssomewhat of refreshment to his exhausted body.

　　"Good-day," said he. "You called me, didn't you?" And hefell, rather than sat down, on one of the seats whichsurrounded the table.

　　"I called you because you were running like a madman, and Iwas afraid you would throw yourself into the sea," saidCaderousse, laughing. "Why, when a man has friends, they arenot only to offer him a glass of wine, but, moreover, toprevent his swallowing three or four pints of waterunnecessarily!"

　　Fernand gave a groan, which resembled a sob, and dropped hishead into his hands, his elbows leaning on the table.

　　"Well, Fernand, I must say," said Caderousse, beginning theconversation, with that brutality of the common people inwhich curiosity destroys all diplomacy, "you look uncommonlylike a rejected lover;" and he burst into a hoarse laugh.

　　"Bah!" said Danglars, "a lad of his make was not born to beunhappy in love. You are laughing at him, Caderousse."

　　"No," he replied, "only hark how he sighs! Come, come,Fernand," said Caderousse, "hold up your head, and answerus. It's not polite not to reply to friends who ask news ofyour health."

　　"My health is well enough," said Fernand, clinching hishands without raising his head.

　　"Ah, you see, Danglars," said Caderousse, winking at hisfriend, "this is how it is; Fernand, whom you see here, is agood and brave Catalan, one of the best fishermen inMarseilles, and he is in love with a very fine girl, namedMercedes; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine girlis in love with the mate of the Pharaon; and as the Pharaonarrived to-day -- why, you understand!"

　　"No; I do not understand," said Danglars.

　　"Poor Fernand has been dismissed," continued Caderousse.

　　"Well, and what then?" said Fernand, lifting up his head,and looking at Caderousse like a man who looks for some oneon whom to vent his anger; "Mercedes is not accountable toany person, is she? Is she not free to love whomsoever shewill?"

　　"Oh, if you take it in that sense," said Caderousse, "it isanother thing. But I thought you were a Catalan, and theytold me the Catalans were not men to allow themselves to besupplanted by a rival. It was even told me that Fernand,especially, was terrible in his vengeance."

　　Fernand smiled piteously. "A lover is never terrible," hesaid.

　　"Poor fellow!" remarked Danglars, affecting to pity theyoung man from the bottom of his heart. "Why, you see, hedid not expect to see Dantes return so suddenly -- hethought he was dead, perhaps; or perchance faithless! Thesethings always come on us more severely when they comesuddenly."

　　"Ah, ma foi, under any circumstances," said Caderousse, whodrank as he spoke, and on whom the fumes of the wine beganto take effect, -- "under any circumstances Fernand is notthe only person put out by the fortunate arrival of Dantes;is he, Danglars?"

　　"No, you are right -- and I should say that would bring himill-luck."

　　"Well, never mind," answered Caderousse, pouring out a glassof wine for Fernand, and filling his own for the eighth orninth time, while Danglars had merely sipped his. "Nevermind -- in the meantime he marries Mercedes -- the lovelyMercedes -- at least he returns to do that."

　　During this time Danglars fixed his piercing glance on theyoung man, on whose heart Caderousse's words fell likemolten lead.

　　"And when is the wedding to be?" he asked.

　　"Oh, it is not yet fixed!" murmured Fernand.

　　"No, but it will be," said Caderousse, "as surely as Danteswill be captain of the Pharaon -- eh, Danglars?"

　　Danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned toCaderousse, whose countenance he scrutinized, to try anddetect whether the blow was premeditated; but he readnothing but envy in a countenance already rendered brutaland stupid by drunkenness.

　　"Well," said he, filling the glasses, "let us drink toCaptain Edmond Dantes, husband of the beautiful Catalane!"

　　Caderousse raised his glass to his mouth with unsteady hand,and swallowed the contents at a gulp. Fernand dashed his onthe ground.

　　"Eh, eh, eh!" stammered Caderousse. "What do I see downthere by the wall, in the direction of the Catalans? Look,Fernand, your eyes are better than mine. I believe I seedouble. You know wine is a deceiver; but I should say it wastwo lovers walking side by side, and hand in hand. Heavenforgive me, they do not know that we can see them, and theyare actually embracing!"

　　Danglars did not lose one pang that Fernand endured.

　　"Do you know them, Fernand?" he said.

　　"Yes," was the reply, in a low voice. "It is Edmond andMercedes!"

　　"Ah, see there, now!" said Caderousse; "and I did notrecognize them! Hallo, Dantes! hello, lovely damsel! Comethis way, and let us know when the wedding is to be, forFernand here is so obstinate he will not tell us."

　　"Hold your tongue, will you?" said Danglars, pretending torestrain Caderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards,leaned out of the arbor. "Try to stand upright, and let thelovers make love without interruption. See, look at Fernand,and follow his example; he is well-behaved!"

　　Fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked byDanglars, as the bull is by the bandilleros, was about torush out; for he had risen from his seat, and seemed to becollecting himself to dash headlong upon his rival, whenMercedes, smiling and graceful, lifted up her lovely head,and looked at them with her clear and bright eyes. At thisFernand recollected her threat of dying if Edmond died, anddropped again heavily on his seat. Danglars looked at thetwo men, one after the other, the one brutalized by liquor,the other overwhelmed with love.

　　"I shall get nothing from these fools," he muttered; "and Iam very much afraid of being here between a drunkard and acoward. Here's an envious fellow making himself boozy onwine when he ought to be nursing his wrath, and here is afool who sees the woman he loves stolen from under his noseand takes on like a big baby. Yet this Catalan has eyes thatglisten like those of the vengeful Spaniards, Sicilians, andCalabrians, and the other has fists big enough to crush anox at one blow. Unquestionably, Edmond's star is in theascendant, and he will marry the splendid girl -- he will becaptain, too, and laugh at us all, unless" -- a sinistersmile passed over Danglars' lips -- "unless I take a hand inthe affair," he added.

　　"Hallo!" continued Caderousse, half-rising, and with hisfist on the table, "hallo, Edmond! do you not see yourfriends, or are you too proud to speak to them?"

　　"No, my dear fellow!" replied Dantes, "I am not proud, but Iam happy, and happiness blinds, I think, more than pride."

　　"Ah, very well, that's an explanation!" said Caderousse."How do you do, Madame Dantes?"

　　Mercedes courtesied gravely, and said -- "That is not myname, and in my country it bodes ill fortune, they say, tocall a young girl by the name of her betrothed before hebecomes her husband. So call me Mercedes, if you please."

　　"We must excuse our worthy neighbor, Caderousse," saidDantes, "he is so easily mistaken."

　　"So, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, M.Dantes," said Danglars, bowing to the young couple.

　　"As soon as possible, M. Danglars; to-day all preliminarieswill be arranged at my father's, and to-morrow, or next dayat latest, the wedding festival here at La Reserve. Myfriends will be there, I hope; that is to say, you areinvited, M. Danglars, and you, Caderousse."

　　"And Fernand," said Caderousse with a chuckle; "Fernand,too, is invited!"

　　"My wife's brother is my brother," said Edmond; "and we,Mercedes and I, should be very sorry if he were absent atsuch a time."

　　Fernand opened his mouth to reply, but his voice died on hislips, and he could not utter a word.

　　"To-day the preliminaries, to-morrow or next day theceremony! You are in a hurry, captain!"

　　"Danglars," said Edmond, smiling, "I will say to you asMercedes said just now to Caderousse, `Do not give me atitle which does not belong to me'; that may bring me badluck."

　　"Your pardon," replied Danglars, "I merely said you seemedin a hurry, and we have lots of time; the Pharaon cannot beunder weigh again in less than three months."

　　"We are always in a hurry to be happy, M. Danglars; for whenwe have suffered a long time, we have great difficulty inbelieving in good fortune. But it is not selfishness alonethat makes me thus in haste; I must go to Paris."

　　"Ah, really? -- to Paris! and will it be the first time youhave ever been there, Dantes?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Have you business there?"

　　"Not of my own; the last commission of poor Captain Leclere;you know to what I allude, Danglars -- it is sacred.Besides, I shall only take the time to go and return."

　　"Yes, yes, I understand," said Danglars, and then in a lowtone, he added, "To Paris, no doubt to deliver the letterwhich the grand marshal gave him. Ah, this letter gives mean idea -- a capital idea! Ah; Dantes, my friend, you arenot yet registered number one on board the good shipPharaon;" then turning towards Edmond, who was walking away,"A pleasant journey," he cried.

　　"Thank you," said Edmond with a friendly nod, and the twolovers continued on their way, as calm and joyous as if theywere the very elect of heaven.

　　Chapter 4Conspiracy.

　　Danglars followed Edmond and Mercedes with his eyes untilthe two lovers disappeared behind one of the angles of FortSaint Nicolas, then turning round, he perceived Fernand, whohad fallen, pale and trembling, into his chair, whileCaderousse stammered out the words of a drinking-song.

　　"Well, my dear sir," said Danglars to Fernand, "here is amarriage which does not appear to make everybody happy."

　　"It drives me to despair," said Fernand.

　　"Do you, then, love Mercedes?"

　　"I adore her!"

　　"For long?"

　　"As long as I have known her -- always."

　　"And you sit there, tearing your hair, instead of seeking toremedy your condition; I did not think that was the way ofyour people."

　　"What would you have me do?" said Fernand.

　　"How do I know? Is it my affair? I am not in love withMademoiselle Mercedes; but for you -- in the words of thegospel, seek, and you shall find."

　　"I have found already."

　　"What?"

　　"I would stab the man, but the woman told me that if anymisfortune happened to her betrothed, she would killherself."

　　"Pooh! Women say those things, but never do them."

　　"You do not know Mercedes; what she threatens she will do."

　　"Idiot!" muttered Danglars; "whether she kill herself ornot, what matter, provided Dantes is not captain?"

　　"Before Mercedes should die," replied Fernand, with theaccents of unshaken resolution, "I would die myself!"

　　"That's what I call love!" said Caderousse with a voice moretipsy than ever. "That's love, or I don't know what loveis."

　　"Come," said Danglars, "you appear to me a good sort offellow, and hang me, I should like to help you, but" --

　　"Yes," said Caderousse, "but how?"

　　"My dear fellow," replied Danglars, "you are three partsdrunk; finish the bottle, and you will be completely so.Drink then, and do not meddle with what we are discussing,for that requires all one's wit and cool judgment."

　　"I -- drunk!" said Caderousse; "well that's a good one! Icould drink four more such bottles; they are no bigger thancologne flasks. Pere Pamphile, more wine!" and Caderousserattled his glass upon the table.

　　"You were saving, sir" -- said Fernand, awaiting with greatanxiety the end of this interrupted remark.

　　"What was I saying? I forget. This drunken Caderousse hasmade me lose the thread of my sentence."

　　"Drunk, if you like; so much the worse for those who fearwine, for it is because they have bad thoughts which theyare afraid the liquor will extract from their hearts;" andCaderousse began to sing the two last lines of a song verypopular at the time, --

　　`Tous les mechants sont beuveurs d'eau;C'est bien prouve par le deluge.'*

　　* "The wicked are great drinkers of waterAs the flood proved once for all."

　　"You said, sir, you would like to help me, but" --

　　"Yes; but I added, to help you it would be sufficient thatDantes did not marry her you love; and the marriage mayeasily be thwarted, methinks, and yet Dantes need not die."

　　"Death alone can separate them," remarked Fernand.

　　"You talk like a noodle, my friend," said Caderousse; "andhere is Danglars, who is a wide-awake, clever, deep fellow,who will prove to you that you are wrong. Prove it,Danglars. I have answered for you. Say there is no need whyDantes should die; it would, indeed, be a pity he should.Dantes is a good fellow; I like Dantes. Dantes, yourhealth."

　　Fernand rose impatiently. "Let him run on," said Danglars,restraining the young man; "drunk as he is, he is not muchout in what he says. Absence severs as well as death, and ifthe walls of a prison were between Edmond and Mercedes theywould be as effectually separated as if he lay under atombstone."

　　"Yes; but one gets out of prison," said Caderousse, who,with what sense was left him, listened eagerly to theconversation, "and when one gets out and one's name isEdmond Dantes, one seeks revenge" --

　　"What matters that?" muttered Fernand.

　　"And why, I should like to know," persisted Caderousse,"should they put Dantes in prison? he has not robbed orkilled or murdered."

　　"Hold your tongue!" said Danglars.

　　"I won't hold my tongue!" replied Caderousse; "I say I wantto know why they should put Dantes in prison; I like Dantes;Dantes, your health!" and he swallowed another glass ofwine.

　　Danglars saw in the muddled look of the tailor the progressof his intoxication, and turning towards Fernand, said,"Well, you understand there is no need to kill him."

　　"Certainly not, if, as you said just now, you have the meansof having Dantes arrested. Have you that means?"

　　"It is to be found for the searching. But why should Imeddle in the matter? it is no affair of mine.";

　　"I know not why you meddle," said Fernand, seizing his arm;"but this I know, you have some motive of personal hatredagainst Dantes, for he who himself hates is never mistakenin the sentiments of others."

　　"I! -- motives of hatred against Dantes? None, on my word! Isaw you were unhappy, and your unhappiness interested me;that's all; but since you believe I act for my own account,adieu, my dear friend, get out of the affair as best youmay;" and Danglars rose as if he meant to depart.

　　"No, no," said Fernand, restraining him, "stay! It is ofvery little consequence to me at the end of the matterwhether you have any angry feeling or not against Dantes. Ihate him! I confess it openly. Do you find the means, I willexecute it, provided it is not to kill the man, for Mercedeshas declared she will kill herself if Dantes is killed."

　　Caderousse, who had let his head drop on the table, nowraised it, and looking at Fernand with his dull and fishyeyes, he said, -- "Kill Dantes! who talks of killing Dantes?I won't have him killed -- I won't! He's my friend, and thismorning offered to share his money with me, as I shared minewith him. I won't have Dantes killed -- I won't!"

　　"And who has said a word about killing him, muddlehead?"replied Danglars. "We were merely joking; drink to hishealth," he added, filling Caderousse's glass, "and do notinterfere with us."

　　"Yes, yes, Dantes' good health!" said Caderousse, emptyinghis glass, "here's to his health! his health -- hurrah!"

　　"But the means -- the means?" said Fernand.

　　"Have you not hit upon any?" asked Danglars.

　　"No! -- you undertook to do so."

　　"True," replied Danglars; "the French have the superiorityover the Spaniards, that the Spaniards ruminate, while theFrench invent."

　　"Do you invent, then," said Fernand impatiently.

　　"Waiter," said Danglars, "pen, ink, and paper."

　　"Pen, ink, and paper," muttered Fernand.

　　"Yes; I am a supercargo; pen, ink, and paper are my tools,and without my tools I am fit for nothing."

　　"Pen, ink, and paper, then," called Fernand loudly.

　　"There's what you want on that table," said the waiter.

　　"Bring them here." The waiter did as he was desired.

　　"When one thinks," said Caderousse, letting his hand drop onthe paper, "there is here wherewithal to kill a man moresure than if we waited at the corner of a wood toassassinate him! I have always had more dread of a pen, abottle of ink, and a sheet of paper, than of a sword orpistol."

　　"The fellow is not so drunk as he appears to be," saidDanglars. "Give him some more wine, Fernand." Fernand filledCaderousse's glass, who, like the confirmed toper he was,lifted his hand from the paper and seized the glass.

　　The Catalan watched him until Caderousse, almost overcome bythis fresh assault on his senses, rested, or rather dropped,his glass upon the table.

　　"Well!" resumed the Catalan, as he saw the final glimmer ofCaderousse's reason vanishing before the last glass of wine.

　　"Well, then, I should say, for instance," resumed Danglars,"that if after a voyage such as Dantes has just made, inwhich he touched at the Island of Elba, some one were todenounce him to the king's procureur as a Bonapartist agent"--

　　"I will denounce him!" exclaimed the young man hastily.

　　"Yes, but they will make you then sign your declaration, andconfront you with him you have denounced; I will supply youwith the means of supporting your accusation, for I know thefact well. But Dantes cannot remain forever in prison, andone day or other he will leave it, and the day when he comesout, woe betide him who was the cause of his incarceration!"

　　"Oh, I should wish nothing better than that he would comeand seek a quarrel with me."

　　"Yes, and Mercedes! Mercedes, who will detest you if youhave only the misfortune to scratch the skin of her dearlybeloved Edmond!"

　　"True!" said Fernand.

　　"No, no," continued Danglars; "if we resolve on such a step,it would be much better to take, as I now do, this pen, dipit into this ink, and write with the left hand (that thewriting may not be recognized) the denunciation we propose."And Danglars, uniting practice with theory, wrote with hisleft hand, and in a writing reversed from his usual style,and totally unlike it, the following lines, which he handedto Fernand, and which Fernand read in an undertone: --

　　"The honorable, the king's attorney, is informed by a friendof the throne and religion, that one Edmond Dantes, mate ofthe ship Pharaon, arrived this morning from Smyrna, afterhaving touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, has beenintrusted by Murat with a letter for the usurper, and by theusurper with a letter for the Bonapartist committee inParis. Proof of this crime will be found on arresting him,for the letter will be found upon him, or at his father's,or in his cabin on board the Pharaon."

　　"Very good," resumed Danglars; "now your revenge looks likecommon-sense, for in no way can it revert to yourself, andthe matter will thus work its own way; there is nothing todo now but fold the letter as I am doing, and write upon it,`To the king's attorney,' and that's all settled." AndDanglars wrote the address as he spoke.

　　"Yes, and that's all settled!" exclaimed Caderousse, who, bya last effort of intellect, had followed the reading of theletter, and instinctively comprehended all the misery whichsuch a denunciation must entail. "Yes, and that's allsettled; only it will be an infamous shame;" and hestretched out his hand to reach the letter.

　　"Yes," said Danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; "andas what I say and do is merely in jest, and I, amongst thefirst and foremost, should be sorry if anything happened toDantes -- the worthy Dantes -- look here!" And taking theletter, he squeezed it up in his hands and threw it into acorner of the arbor.

　　"All right!" said Caderousse. "Dantes is my friend, and Iwon't have him ill-used."

　　"And who thinks of using him ill? Certainly neither I norFernand," said Danglars, rising and looking at the youngman, who still remained seated, but whose eye was fixed onthe denunciatory sheet of paper flung into the corner.

　　"In this case," replied Caderousse, "let's have some morewine. I wish to drink to the health of Edmond and the lovelyMercedes."

　　"You have had too much already, drunkard," said Danglars;"and if you continue, you will be compelled to sleep here,because unable to stand on your legs."

　　"I?" said Caderousse, rising with all the offended dignityof a drunken man, "I can't keep on my legs? Why, I'll wagerI can go up into the belfry of the Accoules, and withoutstaggering, too!"

　　"Done!" said Danglars, "I'll take your bet; but to-morrow --to-day it is time to return. Give me your arm, and let usgo."

　　"Very well, let us go," said Caderousse; "but I don't wantyour arm at all. Come, Fernand, won't you return toMarseilles with us?"

　　"No," said Fernand; "I shall return to the Catalans."

　　"You're wrong. Come with us to Marseilles -- come along."

　　"I will not."

　　"What do you mean? you will not? Well, just as you like, myprince; there's liberty for all the world. Come along,Danglars, and let the young gentleman return to the Catalansif he chooses."

　　Danglars took advantage of Caderousse's temper at themoment, to take him off towards Marseilles by the PorteSaint-Victor, staggering as he went.

　　When they had advanced about twenty yards, Danglars lookedback and saw Fernand stoop, pick up the crumpled paper, andputting it into his pocket then rush out of the arbortowards Pillon.

　　"Well," said Caderousse, "why, what a lie he told! He saidhe was going to the Catalans, and he is going to the city.Hallo, Fernand!"

　　"Oh, you don't see straight," said Danglars; "he's goneright enough."

　　"Well," said Caderousse, "I should have said not -- howtreacherous wine is!"

　　"Come, come," said Danglars to himself, "now the thing is atwork and it will effect its purpose unassisted."

　　Chapter 5The Marriage-Feast.

　　The morning's sun rose clear and resplendent, touching thefoamy waves into a network of ruby-tinted light.

　　The feast had been made ready on the second floor at LaReserve, with whose arbor the reader is already familiar.The apartment destined for the purpose was spacious andlighted by a number of windows, over each of which waswritten in golden letters for some inexplicable reason thename of one of the principal cities of France; beneath thesewindows a wooden balcony extended the entire length of thehouse. And although the entertainment was fixed for twelveo'clock, an hour previous to that time the balcony wasfilled with impatient and expectant guests, consisting ofthe favored part of the crew of the Pharaon, and otherpersonal friends of the bride-groom, the whole of whom hadarrayed themselves in their choicest costumes, in order todo greater honor to the occasion.

　　Various rumors were afloat to the effect that the owners ofthe Pharaon had promised to attend the nuptial feast; butall seemed unanimous in doubting that an act of such rareand exceeding condescension could possibly be intended.

　　Danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompaniedby Caderousse, effectually confirmed the report, statingthat he had recently conversed with M. Morrel, who hadhimself assured him of his intention to dine at La Reserve.

　　In fact, a moment later M. Morrel appeared and was salutedwith an enthusiastic burst of applause from the crew of thePharaon, who hailed the visit of the shipowner as a sureindication that the man whose wedding feast he thusdelighted to honor would ere long be first in command of theship; and as Dantes was universally beloved on board hisvessel, the sailors put no restraint on their tumultuous joyat finding that the opinion and choice of their superiors soexactly coincided with their own.

　　With the entrance of M. Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse weredespatched in search of the bride-groom to convey to him theintelligence of the arrival of the important personage whosecoming had created such a lively sensation, and to beseechhim to make haste.

　　Danglars and Caderousse set off upon their errand at fullspeed; but ere they had gone many steps they perceived agroup advancing towards them, composed of the betrothedpair, a party of young girls in attendance on the bride, bywhose side walked Dantes' father; the whole brought up byFernand, whose lips wore their usual sinister smile.

　　Neither Mercedes nor Edmond observed the strange expressionof his countenance; they were so happy that they wereconscious only of the sunshine and the presence of eachother.

　　Having acquitted themselves of their errand, and exchanged ahearty shake of the hand with Edmond, Danglars andCaderousse took their places beside Fernand and old Dantes,-- the latter of whom attracted universal notice. The oldman was attired in a suit of glistening watered silk,trimmed with steel buttons, beautifully cut and polished.His thin but wiry legs were arrayed in a pair of richlyembroidered clocked stockings, evidently of Englishmanufacture, while from his three-cornered hat depended along streaming knot of white and blue ribbons. Thus he camealong, supporting himself on a curiously carved stick, hisaged countenance lit up with happiness, looking for all theworld like one of the aged dandies of 1796, parading thenewly opened gardens of the Tuileries and Luxembourg. Besidehim glided Caderousse, whose desire to partake of the goodthings provided for the wedding-party had induced him tobecome reconciled to the Dantes, father and son, althoughthere still lingered in his mind a faint and unperfectrecollection of the events of the preceding night; just asthe brain retains on waking in the morning the dim and mistyoutline of a dream.

　　As Danglars approached the disappointed lover, he cast onhim a look of deep meaning, while Fernand, as he slowlypaced behind the happy pair, who seemed, in their ownunmixed content, to have entirely forgotten that such abeing as himself existed, was pale and abstracted;occasionally, however, a deep flush would overspread hiscountenance, and a nervous contraction distort his features,while, with an agitated and restless gaze, he would glancein the direction of Marseilles, like one who eitheranticipated or foresaw some great and important event.

　　Dantes himself was simply, but becomingly, clad in the dresspeculiar to the merchant service -- a costume somewhatbetween a military and a civil garb; and with his finecountenance, radiant with joy and happiness, a more perfectspecimen of manly beauty could scarcely be imagined.

　　Lovely as the Greek girls of Cyprus or Chios, Mercedesboasted the same bright flashing eyes of jet, and ripe,round, coral lips. She moved with the light, free step of anArlesienne or an Andalusian. One more practiced in the artsof great cities would have hid her blushes beneath a veil,or, at least, have cast down her thickly fringed lashes, soas to have concealed the liquid lustre of her animated eyes;but, on the contrary, the delighted girl looked around herwith a smile that seemed to say: "If you are my friends,rejoice with me, for I am very happy."

　　As soon as the bridal party came in sight of La Reserve, M.Morrel descended and came forth to meet it, followed by thesoldiers and sailors there assembled, to whom he hadrepeated the promise already given, that Dantes should bethe successor to the late Captain Leclere. Edmond, at theapproach of his patron, respectfully placed the arm of hisaffianced bride within that of M. Morrel, who, forthwithconducting her up the flight of wooden steps leading to thechamber in which the feast was prepared, was gayly followedby the guests, beneath whose heavy tread the slightstructure creaked and groaned for the space of severalminutes.

　　"Father," said Mercedes, stopping when she had reached thecentre of the table, "sit, I pray you, on my right hand; onmy left I will place him who has ever been as a brother tome," pointing with a soft and gentle smile to Fernand; buther words and look seemed to inflict the direst torture onhim, for his lips became ghastly pale, and even beneath thedark hue of his complexion the blood might be seenretreating as though some sudden pang drove it back to theheart.

　　During this time, Dantes, at the opposite side of the table,had been occupied in similarly placing his most honoredguests. M. Morrel was seated at his right hand, Danglars athis left; while, at a sign from Edmond, the rest of thecompany ranged themselves as they found it most agreeable.

　　Then they began to pass around the dusky, piquant, Arlesiansausages, and lobsters in their dazzling red cuirasses,prawns of large size and brilliant color, the echinus withits prickly outside and dainty morsel within, the clovis,esteemed by the epicures of the South as more than rivallingthe exquisite flavor of the oyster, -- all the delicacies,in fact, that are cast up by the wash of waters on the sandybeach, and styled by the grateful fishermen "fruits of thesea."

　　"A pretty silence truly!" said the old father of thebride-groom, as he carried to his lips a glass of wine ofthe hue and brightness of the topaz, and which had just beenplaced before Mercedes herself. "Now, would anybody thinkthat this room contained a happy, merry party, who desirenothing better than to laugh and dance the hours away?"

　　"Ah," sighed Caderousse, "a man cannot always feel happybecause he is about to be married."

　　"The truth is," replied Dantes, "that I am too happy fornoisy mirth; if that is what you meant by your observation,my worthy friend, you are right; joy takes a strange effectat times, it seems to oppress us almost the same as sorrow."

　　Danglars looked towards Fernand, whose excitable naturereceived and betrayed each fresh impression.

　　"Why, what ails you?" asked he of Edmond. "Do you fear anyapproaching evil? I should say that you were the happiestman alive at this instant."

　　"And that is the very thing that alarms me," returnedDantes. "Man does not appear to me to be intended to enjoyfelicity so unmixed; happiness is like the enchanted palaceswe read of in our childhood, where fierce, fiery dragonsdefend the entrance and approach; and monsters of all shapesand kinds, requiring to be overcome ere victory is ours. Iown that I am lost in wonder to find myself promoted to anhonor of which I feel myself unworthy -- that of being thehusband of Mercedes."

　　"Nay, nay!" cried Caderousse, smiling, "you have notattained that honor yet. Mercedes is not yet your wife. Justassume the tone and manner of a husband, and see how shewill remind you that your hour is not yet come!"

　　The bride blushed, while Fernand, restless and uneasy,seemed to start at every fresh sound, and from time to timewiped away the large drops of perspiration that gathered onhis brow.

　　"Well, never mind that, neighbor Caderousse; it is not worthwhile to contradict me for such a trifle as that. 'Tis truethat Mercedes is not actually my wife; but," added he,drawing out his watch, "in an hour and a half she will be."

　　A general exclamation of surprise ran round the table, withthe exception of the elder Dantes, whose laugh displayed thestill perfect beauty of his large white teeth. Mercedeslooked pleased and gratified, while Fernand grasped thehandle of his knife with a convulsive clutch.

　　"In an hour?" inquired Danglars, turning pale. "How is that,my friend?"

　　"Why, thus it is," replied Dantes. "Thanks to the influenceof M. Morrel, to whom, next to my father, I owe everyblessing I enjoy, every difficulty his been removed. We havepurchased permission to waive the usual delay; and athalf-past two o'clock the mayor of Marseilles will bewaiting for us at the city hall. Now, as a quarter-past onehas already struck, I do not consider I have asserted toomuch in saying, that, in another hour and thirty minutesMercedes will have become Madame Dantes."

　　Fernand closed his eyes, a burning sensation passed acrosshis brow, and he was compelled to support himself by thetable to prevent his falling from his chair; but in spite ofall his efforts, he could not refrain from uttering a deepgroan, which, however, was lost amid the noisy felicitationsof the company.

　　"Upon my word," cried the old man, "you make short work ofthis kind of affair. Arrived here only yesterday morning,and married to-day at three o'clock! Commend me to a sailorfor going the quick way to work!"

　　"But," asked Danglars, in a timid tone, "how did you manageabout the other formalities -- the contract -- thesettlement?"

　　"The contract," answered Dantes, laughingly, "it didn't takelong to fix that. Mercedes has no fortune; I have none tosettle on her. So, you see, our papers were quickly writtenout, and certainly do not come very expensive." This jokeelicited a fresh burst of applause.

　　"So that what we presumed to be merely the betrothal feastturns out to be the actual wedding dinner!" said Danglars.

　　"No, no," answered Dantes; "don't imagine I am going to putyou off in that shabby manner. To-morrow morning I start forParis; four days to go, and the same to return, with one dayto discharge the commission intrusted to me, is all the timeI shall be absent. I shall be back here by the first ofMarch, and on the second I give my real marriage feast."

　　This prospect of fresh festivity redoubled the hilarity ofthe guests to such a degree, that the elder Dantes, who, atthe commencement of the repast, had commented upon thesilence that prevailed, now found it difficult, amid thegeneral din of voices, to obtain a moment's tranquillity inwhich to drink to the health and prosperity of the bride andbride-groom.

　　Dantes, perceiving the affectionate eagerness of his father,responded by a look of grateful pleasure; while Mercedesglanced at the clock and made an expressive gesture toEdmond.

　　Around the table reigned that noisy hilarity which usuallyprevails at such a time among people sufficiently free fromthe demands of social position not to feel the trammels ofetiquette. Such as at the commencement of the repast had notbeen able to seat themselves according to their inclinationrose unceremoniously, and sought out more agreeablecompanions. Everybody talked at once, without waiting for areply and each one seemed to be contented with expressinghis or her own thoughts.

　　Fernand's paleness appeared to have communicated itself toDanglars. As for Fernand himself, he seemed to be enduringthe tortures of the damned; unable to rest, he was among thefirst to quit the table, and, as though seeking to avoid thehilarious mirth that rose in such deafening sounds, hecontinued, in utter silence, to pace the farther end of thesalon.

　　Caderousse approached him just as Danglars, whom Fernandseemed most anxious to avoid, had joined him in a corner ofthe room.

　　"Upon my word," said Caderousse, from whose mind thefriendly treatment of Dantes, united with the effect of the

　　excellent wine he had partaken of, had effaced every feelingof envy or jealousy at Dantes' good fortune, -- "upon myword, Dantes is a downright good fellow, and when I see himsitting there beside his pretty wife that is so soon to be.I cannot help thinking it would have been a great pity tohave served him that trick you were planning yesterday."

　　"Oh, there was no harm meant," answered Danglars; "at firstI certainly did feel somewhat uneasy as to what Fernandmight be tempted to do; but when I saw how completely he hadmastered his feelings, even so far as to become one of hisrival's attendants, I knew there was no further cause forapprehension." Caderousse looked full at Fernand -- he wasghastly pale.

　　"Certainly," continued Danglars, "the sacrifice was notrifling one, when the beauty of the bride is concerned.Upon my soul, that future captain of mine is a lucky dog!Gad, I only wish he would let me take his place."

　　"Shall we not set forth?" asked the sweet, silvery voice ofMercedes; "two o'clock has just struck, and you know we areexpected in a quarter of an hour."

　　"To be sure! -- to be sure!" cried Dantes, eagerly quittingthe table; "let us go directly!"

　　His words were re-echoed by the whole party, with vociferouscheers.

　　At this moment Danglars, who had been incessantly observingevery change in Fernand's look and manner, saw him staggerand fall back, with an almost convulsive spasm, against aseat placed near one of the open windows. At the sameinstant his ear caught a sort of indistinct sound on thestairs, followed by the measured tread of soldiery, with theclanking of swords and military accoutrements; then came ahum and buzz as of many voices, so as to deaden even thenoisy mirth of the bridal party, among whom a vague feelingof curiosity and apprehension quelled every disposition totalk, and almost instantaneously the most deathlikestillness prevailed.

　　The sounds drew nearer. Three blows were struck upon thepanel of the door. The company looked at each other inconsternation.

　　"I demand admittance," said a loud voice outside the room,"in the name of the law!" As no attempt was made to preventit, the door was opened, and a magistrate, wearing hisofficial scarf, presented himself, followed by four soldiersand a corporal. Uneasiness now yielded to the most extremedread on the part of those present.

　　"May I venture to inquire the reason of this unexpectedvisit?" said M. Morrel, addressing the magistrate, whom heevidently knew; "there is doubtless some mistake easilyexplained."

　　"If it be so," replied the magistrate, "rely upon everyreparation being made; meanwhile, I am the bearer of anorder of arrest, and although I most reluctantly perform thetask assigned me, it must, nevertheless, be fulfilled. Whoamong the persons here assembled answers to the name ofEdmond Dantes?" Every eye was turned towards the young manwho, spite of the agitation he could not but feel, advancedwith dignity, and said, in a firm voice, "I am he; what isyour pleasure with me?"

　　"Edmond Dantes," replied the magistrate, "I arrest you inthe name of the law!"

　　"Me!" repeated Edmond, slightly changing color, "andwherefore, I pray?"

　　"I cannot inform you, but you will be duly acquainted withthe reasons that have rendered such a step necessary at thepreliminary examination."

　　M. Morrel felt that further resistance or remonstrance wasuseless. He saw before him an officer delegated to enforcethe law, and perfectly well knew that it would be asunavailing to seek pity from a magistrate decked with hisofficial scarf, as to address a petition to some cold marbleeffigy. Old Dantes, however, sprang forward. There aresituations which the heart of a father or a mother cannot bemade to understand. He prayed and supplicated in terms somoving, that even the officer was touched, and, althoughfirm in his duty, he kindly said, "My worthy friend, let mebeg of you to calm your apprehensions. Your son has probablyneglected some prescribed form or attention in registeringhis cargo, and it is more than probable he will be set atliberty directly he has given the information required,whether touching the health of his crew, or the value of hisfreight."

　　"What is the meaning of all this?" inquired Caderousse,frowningly, of Danglars, who had assumed an air of uttersurprise.

　　"How can I tell you?" replied he; "I am, like yourself,utterly bewildered at all that is going on, and cannot inthe least make out what it is about." Caderousse then lookedaround for Fernand, but he had disappeared.

　　The scene of the previous night now came back to his mindwith startling clearness. The painful catastrophe he hadjust witnessed appeared effectually to have rent away theveil which the intoxication of the evening before had raisedbetween himself and his memory.

　　"So, so," said he, in a hoarse and choking voice, toDanglars, "this, then, I suppose, is a part of the trick youwere concerting yesterday? All I can say is, that if it beso, 'tis an ill turn, and well deserves to bring double evilon those who have projected it."

　　"Nonsense," returned Danglars, "I tell you again I havenothing whatever to do with it; besides, you know very wellthat I tore the paper to pieces."

　　"No, you did not!" answered Caderousse, "you merely threw itby -- I saw it lying in a corner."

　　"Hold your tongue, you fool! -- what should you know aboutit? -- why, you were drunk!"

　　"Where is Fernand?" inquired Caderousse.

　　"How do I know?" replied Danglars; "gone, as every prudentman ought to be, to look after his own affairs, most likely.Never mind where he is, let you and I go and see what is tobe done for our poor friends."

　　During this conversation, Dantes, after having exchanged acheerful shake of the hand with all his sympathizingfriends, had surrendered himself to the officer sent toarrest him, merely saying, "Make yourselves quite easy, mygood fellows, there is some little mistake to clear up,that's all, depend upon it; and very likely I may not haveto go so far as the prison to effect that."

　　"Oh, to be sure!" responded Danglars, who had now approachedthe group, "nothing more than a mistake, I feel quitecertain."

　　Dantes descended the staircase, preceded by the magistrate,and followed by the soldiers. A carriage awaited him at thedoor; he got in, followed by two soldiers and themagistrate, and the vehicle drove off towards Marseilles.

　　"Adieu, adieu, dearest Edmond!" cried Mercedes, stretchingout her arms to him from the balcony.

　　The prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of abroken heart, and leaning from the coach he called out,"Good-by, Mercedes -- we shall soon meet again!" Then thevehicle disappeared round one of the turnings of Fort SaintNicholas.

　　"Wait for me here, all of you!" cried M. Morrel; "I willtake the first conveyance I find, and hurry to Marseilles,whence I will bring you word how all is going on."

　　"That's right!" exclaimed a multitude of voices, "go, andreturn as quickly as you can!"

　　This second departure was followed by a long and fearfulstate of terrified silence on the part of those who wereleft behind. The old father and Mercedes remained for sometime apart, each absorbed in grief; but at length the twopoor victims of the same blow raised their eyes, and with asimultaneous burst of feeling rushed into each other's arms.

　　Meanwhile Fernand made his appearance, poured out forhimself a glass of water with a trembling hand; then hastilyswallowing it, went to sit down at the first vacant place,and this was, by mere chance, placed next to the seat onwhich poor Mercedes had fallen half fainting, when releasedfrom the warm and affectionate embrace of old Dantes.Instinctively Fernand drew back his chair.

　　"He is the cause of all this misery -- I am quite sure ofit," whispered Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes offFernand, to Danglars.

　　"I don't think so," answered the other; he's too stupid toimagine such a scheme. I only hope the mischief will fallupon the head of whoever wrought it."

　　"You don't mention those who aided and abetted the deed,"said Caderousse.

　　"Surely," answered Danglars, "one cannot be held responsiblefor every chance arrow shot into the air."

　　"You can, indeed, when the arrow lights point downward onsomebody's head."

　　Meantime the subject of the arrest was being canvassed inevery different form.

　　"What think you, Danglars," said one of the party, turningtowards him, "of this event?"

　　"Why," replied he, "I think it just possible Dantes may havebeen detected with some trifling article on board shipconsidered here as contraband."

　　"But how could he have done so without your knowledge,Danglars, since you are the ship's supercargo?"

　　"Why, as for that, I could only know what I was toldrespecting the merchandise with which the vessel was laden.I know she was loaded with cotton, and that she took in herfreight at Alexandria from Pastret's warehouse, and atSmyrna from Pascal's; that is all I was obliged to know, andI beg I may not be asked for any further particulars."

　　"Now I recollect," said the afflicted old father; "my poorboy told me yesterday he had got a small case of coffee, andanother of tobacco for me!"

　　"There, you see," exclaimed Danglars. "Now the mischief isout; depend upon it the custom-house people went rummagingabout the ship in our absence, and discovered poor Dantes'hidden treasures."

　　Mercedes, however, paid no heed to this explanation of herlover's arrest. Her grief, which she had hitherto tried torestrain, now burst out in a violent fit of hystericalsobbing.

　　"Come, come," said the old man, "be comforted, my poorchild; there is still hope!"

　　"Hope!" repeated Danglars.

　　"Hope!" faintly murmured Fernand, but the word seemed to dieaway on his pale agitated lips, and a convulsive spasmpassed over his countenance.

　　"Good news! good news!" shouted forth one of the partystationed in the balcony on the lookout. "Here comes M.Morrel back. No doubt, now, we shall hear that our friend isreleased!"

　　Mercedes and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner andgreeted him at the door. He was very pale.

　　"What news?" exclaimed a general burst of voices.

　　"Alas, my friends," replied M. Morrel, with a mournful shakeof his head, "the thing has assumed a more serious aspectthan I expected."

　　"Oh, indeed -- indeed, sir, he is innocent!" sobbed forthMercedes.

　　"That I believe!" answered M. Morrel; "but still he ischarged" --

　　"With what?" inquired the elder Dantes.

　　"With being an agent of the Bonapartist faction!" Many ofour readers may be able to recollect how formidable such anaccusation became in the period at which our story is dated.

　　A despairing cry escaped the pale lips of Mercedes; the oldman sank into a chair.

　　"Ah, Danglars!" whispered Caderousse, "you have deceived me-- the trick you spoke of last night has been played; but Icannot suffer a poor old man or an innocent girl to die ofgrief through your fault. I am determined to tell them allabout it."

　　"Be silent, you simpleton!" cried Danglars, grasping him bythe arm, "or I will not answer even for your own safety. Whocan tell whether Dantes be innocent or guilty? The vesseldid touch at Elba, where he quitted it, and passed a wholeday in the island. Now, should any letters or otherdocuments of a compromising character be found upon him,will it not be taken for granted that all who uphold him arehis accomplices?"

　　With the rapid instinct of selfishness, Caderousse readilyperceived the solidity of this mode of reasoning; he gazed,doubtfully, wistfully, on Danglars, and then cautionsupplanted generosity.

　　"Suppose we wait a while, and see what comes of it," saidhe, casting a bewildered look on his companion.

　　"To be sure!" answered Danglars. "Let us wait, by all means.If he be innocent, of course he will be set at liberty; ifguilty, why, it is no use involving ourselves in aconspiracy."

　　"Let us go, then. I cannot stay here any longer."

　　"With all my heart!" replied Danglars, pleased to find theother so tractable. "Let us take ourselves out of the way,and leave things for the present to take their course."

　　After their departure, Fernand, who had now again become thefriend and protector of Mercedes, led the girl to her home,while the friends of Dantes conducted the now half-faintingman back to his abode.

　　The rumor of Edmond arrest as a Bonapartist agent was notslow in circulating throughout the city.

　　"Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dearDanglars?" asked M. Morrel, as, on his return to the portfor the purpose of gleaning fresh tidings of Dantes, from M.de Villefort, the assistant procureur, he overtook hissupercargo and Caderousse. "Could you have believed such athing possible?"

　　"Why, you know I told you," replied Danglars, "that Iconsidered the circumstance of his having anchored at theIsland of Elba as a very suspicious circumstance."

　　"And did you mention these suspicions to any person besidemyself?"

　　"Certainly not!" returned Danglars. Then added in a lowwhisper, "You understand that, on account of your uncle, M.Policar Morrel, who served under the other government, andwho does not altogether conceal what he thinks on thesubject, you are strongly suspected of regretting theabdication of Napoleon. I should have feared to injure bothEdmond and yourself, had I divulged my own apprehensions toa soul. I am too well aware that though a subordinate, likemyself, is bound to acquaint the shipowner with everythingthat occurs, there are many things he ought most carefullyto conceal from all else."

　　"'Tis well, Danglars -- 'tis well!" replied M. Morrel. "Youare a worthy fellow; and I had already thought of yourinterests in the event of poor Edmond having become captainof the Pharaon."

　　"Is it possible you were so kind?"

　　"Yes, indeed; I had previously inquired of Dantes what washis opinion of you, and if he should have any reluctance tocontinue you in your post, for somehow I have perceived asort of coolness between you."

　　"And what was his reply?"

　　"That he certainly did think he had given you offence in anaffair which he merely referred to without entering intoparticulars, but that whoever possessed the good opinion andconfidence of the ship's owner would have his preferencealso."

　　"The hypocrite!" murmured Danglars.

　　"Poor Dantes!" said Caderousse. "No one can deny his being anoble-hearted young fellow."

　　"But meanwhile," continued M. Morrel, "here is the Pharaonwithout a captain."

　　"Oh," replied Danglars, "since we cannot leave this port forthe next three months, let us hope that ere the expirationof that period Dantes will be set at liberty."

　　"No doubt; but in the meantime?"

　　"I am entirely at your service, M. Morrel," answeredDanglars. "You know that I am as capable of managing a shipas the most experienced captain in the service; and it willbe so far advantageous to you to accept my services, thatupon Edmond's release from prison no further change will berequisite on board the Pharaon than for Dantes and myselfeach to resume our respective posts."

　　"Thanks, Danglars -- that will smooth over all difficulties.I fully authorize you at once to assume the command of thePharaon, and look carefully to the unloading of her freight.Private misfortunes must never be allowed to interfere withbusiness."

　　"Be easy on that score, M. Morrel; but do you think we shallbe permitted to see our poor Edmond?"

　　"I will let you know that directly I have seen M. deVillefort, whom I shall endeavor to interest in Edmond'sfavor. I am aware he is a furious royalist; but, in spite ofthat, and of his being king's attorney, he is a man likeourselves, and I fancy not a bad sort of one."

　　"Perhaps not," replied Danglars; "but I hear that he isambitions, and that's rather against him."

　　"Well, well," returned M. Morrel, "we shall see. But nowhasten on board, I will join you there ere long." So saying,the worthy shipowner quitted the two allies, and proceededin the direction of the Palais de Justice.

　　"You see," said Danglars, addressing Caderousse, "the turnthings have taken. Do you still feel any desire to stand upin his defence?"

　　"Not the slightest, but yet it seems to me a shocking thingthat a mere joke should lead to such consequences."

　　"But who perpetrated that joke, let me ask? neither you normyself, but Fernand; you knew very well that I threw thepaper into a corner of the room -- indeed, I fancied I haddestroyed it."

　　"Oh, no," replied Caderousse, "that I can answer for, youdid not. I only wish I could see it now as plainly as I sawit lying all crushed and crumpled in a corner of the arbor."

　　"Well, then, if you did, depend upon it, Fernand picked itup, and either copied it or caused it to be copied; perhaps,even, he did not take the trouble of recopying it. And now Ithink of it, by Heavens, he may have sent the letter itself!Fortunately, for me, the handwriting was disguised."

　　"Then you were aware of Dantes being engaged in aconspiracy?"

　　"Not I. As I before said, I thought the whole thing was ajoke, nothing more. It seems, however, that I haveunconsciously stumbled upon the truth."

　　"Still," argued Caderousse, "I would give a great deal ifnothing of the kind had happened; or, at least, that I hadhad no hand in it. You will see, Danglars, that it will turnout an unlucky job for both of us."

　　"Nonsense! If any harm come of it, it should fall on theguilty person; and that, you know, is Fernand. How can we beimplicated in any way? All we have got to do is, to keep ourown counsel, and remain perfectly quiet, not breathing aword to any living soul; and you will see that the stormwill pass away without in the least affecting us."

　　"Amen!" responded Caderousse, waving his hand in token ofadieu to Danglars, and bending his steps towards the Alleesde Meillan, moving his head to and fro, and muttering as hewent, after the manner of one whose mind was overchargedwith one absorbing idea.

　　"So far, then," said Danglars, mentally, "all has gone as Iwould have it. I am, temporarily, commander of the Pharaon,with the certainty of being permanently so, if that fool ofa Caderousse can be persuaded to hold his tongue. My onlyfear is the chance of Dantes being released. But, there, heis in the hands of Justice; and," added he with a smile,"she will take her own." So saying, he leaped into a boat,desiring to be rowed on board the Pharaon, where M. Morrelhad agreed to meet him.

　　Chapter 6The Deputy Procureur du Roi.

　　In one of the aristocratic mansions built by Puget in theRue du Grand Cours opposite the Medusa fountain, a secondmarriage feast was being celebrated, almost at the same hourwith the nuptial repast given by Dantes. In this case,however, although the occasion of the entertainment wassimilar, the company was strikingly dissimilar. Instead of arude mixture of sailors, soldiers, and those belonging tothe humblest grade of life, the present assembly wascomposed of the very flower of Marseilles society, --magistrates who had resigned their office during theusurper's reign; officers who had deserted from the imperialarmy and joined forces with Conde; and younger members offamilies, brought up to hate and execrate the man whom fiveyears of exile would convert into a martyr, and fifteen ofrestoration elevate to the rank of a god.

　　The guests were still at table, and the heated and energeticconversation that prevailed betrayed the violent andvindictive passions that then agitated each dweller of theSouth, where unhappily, for five centuries religious strifehad long given increased bitterness to the violence of partyfeeling.

　　The emperor, now king of the petty Island of Elba, afterhaving held sovereign sway over one-half of the world,counting as his subjects a small population of five or sixthousand souls, -- after having been accustomed to hear the"Vive Napoleons" of a hundred and twenty millions of humanbeings, uttered in ten different languages, -- was lookedupon here as a ruined man, separated forever from any freshconnection with France or claim to her throne.

　　The magistrates freely discussed their political views; themilitary part of the company talked unreservedly of Moscowand Leipsic, while the women commented on the divorce ofJosephine. It was not over the downfall of the man, but overthe defeat of the Napoleonic idea, that they rejoiced, andin this they foresaw for themselves the bright and cheeringprospect of a revivified political existence.

　　An old man, decorated with the cross of Saint Louis, nowrose and proposed the health of King Louis XVIII. It was theMarquis de Saint-Meran. This toast, recalling at once thepatient exile of Hartwell and the peace-loving King ofFrance, excited universal enthusiasm; glasses were elevatedin the air a l'Anglais, and the ladies, snatching theirbouquets from their fair bosoms, strewed the table withtheir floral treasures. In a word, an almost poetical fervorprevailed.

　　"Ah," said the Marquise de Saint-Meran, a woman with astern, forbidding eye, though still noble and distinguishedin appearance, despite her fifty years -- "ah, theserevolutionists, who have driven us from those verypossessions they afterwards purchased for a mere trifleduring the Reign of Terror, would be compelled to own, werethey here, that all true devotion was on our side, since wewere content to follow the fortunes of a falling monarch,while they, on the contrary, made their fortune byworshipping the rising sun; yes, yes, they could not helpadmitting that the king, for whom we sacrificed rank,wealth, and station was truly our `Louis the well-beloved,'while their wretched usurper his been, and ever will be, tothem their evil genius, their `Napoleon the accursed.' Am Inot right, Villefort?"

　　"I beg your pardon, madame. I really must pray you to excuseme, but -- in truth -- I was not attending to theconversation."

　　"Marquise, marquise!" interposed the old nobleman who hadproposed the toast, "let the young people alone; let me tellyou, on one's wedding day there are more agreeable subjectsof conversation than dry politics."

　　"Never mind, dearest mother," said a young and lovely girl,with a profusion of light brown hair, and eyes that seemedto float in liquid crystal, "'tis all my fault for seizingupon M. de Villefort, so as to prevent his listening to whatyou said. But there -- now take him -- he is your own for aslong as you like. M. Villefort, I beg to remind you mymother speaks to you."

　　"If the marquise will deign to repeat the words I butimperfectly caught, I shall be delighted to answer," said M.de Villefort.

　　"Never mind, Renee," replied the marquise, with a look oftenderness that seemed out of keeping with her harsh dryfeatures; but, however all other feelings may be withered ina woman's nature, there is always one bright smiling spot inthe desert of her heart, and that is the shrine of maternallove. "I forgive you. What I was saying, Villefort, was,that the Bonapartists had not our sincerity, enthusiasm, ordevotion."

　　"They had, however, what supplied the place of those finequalities," replied the young man, "and that was fanaticism.Napoleon is the Mahomet of the West, and is worshipped byhis commonplace but ambitions followers, not only as aleader and lawgiver, but also as the personification ofequality."

　　"He!" cried the marquise: "Napoleon the type of equality!For mercy's sake, then, what would you call Robespierre?Come, come, do not strip the latter of his just rights tobestow them on the Corsican, who, to my mind, has usurpedquite enough."

　　"Nay, madame; I would place each of these heroes on hisright pedestal -- that of Robespierre on his scaffold in thePlace Louis Quinze; that of Napoleon on the column of thePlace Vendome. The only difference consists in the oppositecharacter of the equality advocated by these two men; one isthe equality that elevates, the other is the equality thatdegrades; one brings a king within reach of the guillotine,the other elevates the people to a level with the throne.Observe," said Villefort, smiling, "I do not mean to denythat both these men were revolutionary scoundrels, and thatthe 9th Thermidor and the 4th of April, in the year 1814,were lucky days for France, worthy of being gratefullyremembered by every friend to monarchy and civil order; andthat explains how it comes to pass that, fallen, as I trusthe is forever, Napoleon has still retained a train ofparasitical satellites. Still, marquise, it has been so withother usurpers -- Cromwell, for instance, who was not halfso bad as Napoleon, had his partisans and advocates."

　　"Do you know, Villefort, that you are talking in a mostdreadfully revolutionary strain? But I excuse it, it isimpossible to expect the son of a Girondin to be free from asmall spice of the old leaven." A deep crimson suffused thecountenance of Villefort.

　　"'Tis true, madame," answered he, "that my father was aGirondin, but he was not among the number of those who votedfor the king's death; he was an equal sufferer with yourselfduring the Reign of Terror, and had well-nigh lost his headon the same scaffold on which your father perished."

　　"True," replied the marquise, without wincing in theslightest degree at the tragic remembrance thus called up;"but bear in mind, if you please, that our respectiveparents underwent persecution and proscription fromdiametrically opposite principles; in proof of which I mayremark, that while my family remained among the stanchestadherents of the exiled princes, your father lost no time injoining the new government; and that while the CitizenNoirtier was a Girondin, the Count Noirtier became asenator."

　　"Dear mother," interposed Renee, "you know very well it wasagreed that all these disagreeable reminiscences shouldforever be laid aside."

　　"Suffer me, also, madame," replied Villefort, "to add myearnest request to Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran's, that youwill kindly allow the veil of oblivion to cover and concealthe past. What avails recrimination over matters wholly pastrecall? For my own part, I have laid aside even the name ofmy father, and altogether disown his political principles.He was -- nay, probably may still be -- a Bonapartist, andis called Noirtier; I, on the contrary, am a stanchroyalist, and style myself de Villefort. Let what may remainof revolutionary sap exhaust itself and die away with theold trunk, and condescend only to regard the young shootwhich has started up at a distance from the parent tree,without having the power, any more than the wish, toseparate entirely from the stock from which it sprung."

　　"Bravo, Villefort!" cried the marquis; "excellently wellsaid! Come, now, I have hopes of obtaining what I have beenfor years endeavoring to persuade the marquise to promise;namely, a perfect amnesty and forgetfulness of the past."

　　"With all my heart," replied the marquise; "let the past beforever forgotten. I promise you it affords me as littlepleasure to revive it as it does you. All I ask is, thatVillefort will be firm and inflexible for the future in hispolitical principles. Remember, also, Villefort, that wehave pledged ourselves to his majesty for your fealty andstrict loyalty, and that at our recommendation the kingconsented to forget the past, as I do" (and here sheextended to him her hand) -- "as I now do at your entreaty.But bear in mind, that should there fall in your way any oneguilty of conspiring against the government, you will be somuch the more bound to visit the offence with rigorouspunishment, as it is known you belong to a suspectedfamily."

　　"Alas, madame," returned Villefort, "my profession, as wellas the times in which we live, compels me to be severe. Ihave already successfully conducted several publicprosecutions, and brought the offenders to meritedpunishment. But we have not done with the thing yet."

　　"Do you, indeed, think so?" inquired the marquise.

　　"I am, at least, fearful of it. Napoleon, in the Island ofElba, is too near France, and his proximity keeps up thehopes of his partisans. Marseilles is filled with half-payofficers, who are daily, under one frivolous pretext orother, getting up quarrels with the royalists; from hencearise continual and fatal duels among the higher classes ofpersons, and assassinations in the lower."

　　"You have heard, perhaps," said the Comte de Salvieux, oneof M. de Saint-Meran's oldest friends, and chamberlain tothe Comte d'Artois, "that the Holy Alliance purpose removinghim from thence?"

　　"Yes; they were talking about it when we left Paris," saidM. de Saint-Meran; "and where is it decided to transferhim?"

　　"To Saint Helena."

　　"For heaven's sake, where is that?" asked the marquise.

　　"An island situated on the other side of the equator, atleast two thousand leagues from here," replied the count.

　　"So much the better. As Villefort observes, it is a greatact of folly to have left such a man between Corsica, wherehe was born, and Naples, of which his brother-in-law isking, and face to face with Italy, the sovereignty of whichhe coveted for his son."

　　"Unfortunately," said Villefort, "there are the treaties of1814, and we cannot molest Napoleon without breaking thosecompacts."

　　"Oh, well, we shall find some way out of it," responded M.de Salvieux. "There wasn't any trouble over treaties when itwas a question of shooting the poor Duc d'Enghien."

　　"Well," said the marquise, "it seems probable that, by theaid of the Holy Alliance, we shall be rid of Napoleon; andwe must trust to the vigilance of M. de Villefort to purifyMarseilles of his partisans. Tbe king is either a king or noking; if he be acknowledged as sovereign of France, heshould be upheld in peace and tranquillity; and this canbest be effected by employing the most inflexible agents toput down every attempt at conspiracy -- 'tis the best andsurest means of preventing mischief."

　　"Unfortunately, madame," answered Villefort, "the strong armof the law is not called upon to interfere until the evilhas taken place."

　　"Then all he has got to do is to endeavor to repair it."

　　"Nay, madame, the law is frequently powerless to effectthis; all it can do is to avenge the wrong done."

　　"Oh, M. de Villefort," cried a beautiful young creature,daughter to the Comte de Salvieux, and the cherished friendof Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran, "do try and get up somefamous trial while we are at Marseilles. I never was in alaw-court; I am told it is so very amusing!"

　　"Amusing, certainly," replied the young man, "inasmuch as,instead of shedding tears as at the fictitious tale of woeproduced at a theatre, you behold in a law-court a case ofreal and genuine distress -- a drama of life. The prisonerwhom you there see pale, agitated, and alarmed, instead of-- as is the case when a curtain falls on a tragedy -- goinghome to sup peacefully with his family, and then retiring torest, that he may recommence his mimic woes on the morrow,-- is removed from your sight merely to be reconducted tohis prison and delivered up to the executioner. I leave youto judge how far your nerves are calculated to bear youthrough such a scene. Of this, however, be assured, thatshould any favorable opportunity present itself, I will notfail to offer you the choice of being present."

　　"For shame, M. de Villefort!" said Renee, becoming quitepale; "don't you see how you are frightening us? -- and yetyou laugh."

　　"What would you have? 'Tis like a duel. I have alreadyrecorded sentence of death, five or six times, against themovers of political conspiracies, and who can say how manydaggers may be ready sharpened, and only waiting a favorableopportunity to be buried in my heart?"

　　"Gracious heavens, M. de Villefort," said Renee, becomingmore and more terrified; "you surely are not in earnest."

　　"Indeed I am," replied the young magistrate with a smile;"and in the interesting trial that young lady is anxious towitness, the case would only be still more aggravated.Suppose, for instance, the prisoner, as is more thanprobable, to have served under Napoleon -- well, can youexpect for an instant, that one accustomed, at the word ofhis commander, to rush fearlessly on the very bayonets ofhis foe, will scruple more to drive a stiletto into theheart of one he knows to be his personal enemy, than toslaughter his fellow-creatures, merely because bidden to doso by one he is bound to obey? Besides, one requires theexcitement of being hateful in the eyes of the accused, inorder to lash one's self into a state of sufficientvehemence and power. I would not choose to see the managainst whom I pleaded smile, as though in mockery of mywords. No; my pride is to see the accused pale, agitated,and as though beaten out of all composure by the fire of myeloquence." Renee uttered a smothered exclamation.

　　"Bravo!" cried one of the guests; "that is what I calltalking to some purpose."

　　"Just the person we require at a time like the present,"said a second.

　　"What a splendid business that last case of yours was, mydear Villefort!" remarked a third; "I mean the trial of theman for murdering his father. Upon my word, you killed himere the executioner had laid his hand upon him."

　　"Oh, as for parricides, and such dreadful people as that,"interposed Renee, "it matters very little what is done tothem; but as regards poor unfortunate creatures whose onlycrime consists in having mixed themselves up in politicalintrigues" --

　　"Why, that is the very worst offence they could possiblycommit; for, don't you see, Renee, the king is the father ofhis people, and he who shall plot or contrive aught againstthe life and safety of the parent of thirty-two millions ofsouls, is a parricide upon a fearfully great scale?"

　　"I don't know anything about that," replied Renee; "but, M.de Villefort, you have promised me -- have you not? --always to show mercy to those I plead for."

　　"Make yourself quite easy on that point," answeredVillefort, with one of his sweetest smiles; "you and I willalways consult upon our verdicts."

　　"My love," said the marquise, "attend to your doves, yourlap-dogs, and embroidery, but do not meddle with what you donot understand. Nowadays the military profession is inabeyance and the magisterial robe is the badge of honor.There is a wise Latin proverb that is very much in point."

　　"Cedant arma togae," said Villefort with a bow.

　　"I cannot speak Latin," responded the marquise.

　　"Well," said Renee, "I cannot help regretting you had notchosen some other profession than your own -- a physician,for instance. Do you know I always felt a shudder at theidea of even a destroying angel?"

　　"Dear, good Renee," whispered Villefort, as he gazed withunutterable tenderness on the lovely speaker.

　　"Let us hope, my child," cried the marquis, "that M. deVillefort may prove the moral and political physician ofthis province; if so, he will have achieved a noble work."

　　"And one which will go far to efface the recollection of hisfather's conduct," added the incorrigible marquise.

　　"Madame," replied Villefort, with a mournful smile, "I havealready had the honor to observe that my father has -- atleast, I hope so -- abjured his past errors, and that he is,at the present moment, a firm and zealous friend to religionand order -- a better royalist, possibly, than his son; forhe has to atone for past dereliction, while I have no otherimpulse than warm, decided preference and conviction."Having made this well-turned speech, Villefort lookedcarefully around to mark the effect of his oratory, much ashe would have done had he been addressing the bench in opencourt.

　　"Do you know, my dear Villefort," cried the Comte deSalvieux, "that is exactly what I myself said the other dayat the Tuileries, when questioned by his majesty's principalchamberlain touching the singularity of an alliance betweenthe son of a Girondin and the daughter of an officer of theDuc de Conde; and I assure you he seemed fully to comprehendthat this mode of reconciling political differences wasbased upon sound and excellent principles. Then the king,who, without our suspecting it, had overheard ourconversation, interrupted us by saying, `Villefort' --observe that the king did not pronounce the word Noirtier,but, on the contrary, placed considerable emphasis on thatof Villefort -- `Villefort,' said his majesty, `is a youngman of great judgment and discretion, who will be sure tomake a figure in his profession; I like him much, and itgave me great pleasure to hear that he was about to becomethe son-in-law of the Marquis and Marquise de Saint-Meran. Ishould myself have recommended the match, had not the noblemarquis anticipated my wishes by requesting my consent toit.'"

　　"Is it possible the king could have condescended so far asto express himself so favorably of me?" asked the enrapturedVillefort.

　　"I give you his very words; and if the marquis chooses to becandid, he will confess that they perfectly agree with whathis majesty said to him, when he went six months ago toconsult him upon the subject of your espousing hisdaughter."

　　"That is true," answered the marquis.

　　"How much do I owe this gracious prince! What is there Iwould not do to evince my earnest gratitude!"

　　"That is right," cried the marquise. "I love to see youthus. Now, then, were a conspirator to fall into your hands,he would be most welcome."

　　"For my part, dear mother." interposed Renee, "I trust yourwishes will not prosper, and that Providence will onlypermit petty offenders, poor debtors, and miserable cheatsto fall into M. de Villefort's hands, -- then I shall becontented."

　　"Just the same as though you prayed that a physician mightonly be called upon to prescribe for headaches, measles, andthe stings of wasps, or any other slight affection of theepidermis. If you wish to see me the king's attorney, youmust desire for me some of those violent and dangerousdiseases from the cure of which so much honor redounds tothe physician."

　　At this moment, and as though the utterance of Villefort'swish had sufficed to effect its accomplishment, a servantentered the room, and whispered a few words in his ear.Villefort immediately rose from table and quitted the roomupon the plea of urgent business; he soon, however,returned, his whole face beaming with delight. Reneeregarded him with fond affection; and certainly his handsomefeatures, lit up as they then were with more than usual fireand animation, seemed formed to excite the innocentadmiration with which she gazed on her graceful andintelligent lover.

　　"You were wishing just now," said Villefort, addressing her,"that I were a doctor instead of a lawyer. Well, I at leastresemble the disciples of Esculapius in one thing -- that ofnot being able to call a day my own, not even that of mybetrothal."

　　"And wherefore were you called away just now?" askedMademoiselle de Saint-Meran, with an air of deep interest.

　　"For a very serious matter, which bids fair to make work forthe executioner."

　　"How dreadful!" exclaimed Renee, turning pale.

　　"Is it possible?" burst simultaneously from all who werenear enough to the magistrate to hear his words.

　　"Why, if my information prove correct, a sort of Bonaparteconspiracy has just been discovered."

　　"Can I believe my ears?" cried the marquise.

　　"I will read you the letter containing the accusation, atleast," said Villefort: --

　　"`The king's attorney is informed by a friend to the throneand the religions institutions of his country, that onenamed Edmond Dantes, mate of the ship Pharaon, this dayarrived from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples andPorto-Ferrajo, has been the bearer of a letter from Murat tothe usurper, and again taken charge of another letter fromthe usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris. Amplecorroboration of this statement may be obtained by arrestingthe above-mentioned Edmond Dantes, who either carries theletter for Paris about with him, or has it at his father'sabode. Should it not be found in the possession of father orson, then it will assuredly be discovered in the cabinbelonging to the said Dantes on board the Pharaon.'"

　　"But," said Renee, "this letter, which, after all, is but ananonymous scrawl, is not even addressed to you, but to theking's attorney."

　　"True; but that gentleman being absent, his secretary, byhis orders, opened his letters; thinking this one ofimportance, he sent for me, but not finding me, took uponhimself to give the necessary orders for arresting theaccused party."

　　"Then the guilty person is absolutely in custody?" said themarquise.

　　"Nay, dear mother, say the accused person. You know wecannot yet pronounce him guilty."

　　"He is in safe custody," answered Villefort; "and rely uponit, if the letter is found, he will not be likely to betrusted abroad again, unless he goes forth under theespecial protection of the headsman."

　　"And where is the unfortunate being?" asked Renee.

　　"He is at my house."

　　"Come, come, my friend," interrupted the marquise, "do notneglect your duty to linger with us. You are the king'sservant, and must go wherever that service calls you."

　　"O Villefort!" cried Renee, clasping her hands, and lookingtowards her lover with piteous earnestness, "be merciful onthis the day of our betrothal."

　　The young man passed round to the side of the table wherethe fair pleader sat, and leaning over her chair saidtenderly, --

　　"To give you pleasure, my sweet Renee, I promise to show allthe lenity in my power; but if the charges brought againstthis Bonapartist hero prove correct, why, then, you reallymust give me leave to order his head to be cut off." Reneeshuddered.

　　"Never mind that foolish girl, Villefort," said themarquise. "She will soon get over these things." So saying,Madame de Saint-Meran extended her dry bony hand toVillefort, who, while imprinting a son-in-law's respectfulsalute on it, looked at Renee, as much as to say, "I musttry and fancy 'tis your dear hand I kiss, as it should havebeen."

　　"These are mournful auspices to accompany a betrothal,"sighed poor Renee.

　　"Upon my word, child!" exclaimed the angry marquise, "yourfolly exceeds all bounds. I should be glad to know whatconnection there can possibly be between your sicklysentimentality and the affairs of the state!"

　　"O mother!" murmured Renee.

　　"Nay, madame, I pray you pardon this little traitor. Ipromise you that to make up for her want of loyalty, I willbe most inflexibly severe;" then casting an expressiveglance at his betrothed, which seemed to say, "Fear not, foryour dear sake my justice shall be tempered with mercy," andreceiving a sweet and approving smile in return, Villefortquitted the room.

　　Chapter 7The Examination.

　　No sooner had Villefort left the salon, than he assumed thegrave air of a man who holds the balance of life and deathin his hands. Now, in spite of the mobility of hiscountenance, the command of which, like a finished actor, hehad carefully studied before the glass, it was by no meanseasy for him to assume an air of judicial severity. Exceptthe recollection of the line of politics his father hadadopted, and which might interfere, unless he acted with thegreatest prudence, with his own career, Gerard de Villefortwas as happy as a man could be. Already rich, he held a highofficial situation, though only twenty-seven. He was aboutto marry a young and charming woman, whom he loved, notpassionately, but reasonably, as became a deputy attorney ofthe king; and besides her personal attractions, which werevery great, Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran's family possessedconsiderable political influence, which they would, ofcourse, exert in his favor. The dowry of his wife amountedto fifty thousand crowns, and he had, besides, the prospectof seeing her fortune increased to half a million at herfather's death. These considerations naturally gaveVillefort a feeling of such complete felicity that his mindwas fairly dazzled in its contemplation.

　　At the door he met the commissary of police, who was waitingfor him. The sight of this officer recalled Villefort fromthe third heaven to earth; he composed his face, as we havebefore described, and said, "I have read the letter, sir,and you have acted rightly in arresting this man; now informme what you have discovered concerning him and theconspiracy."

　　"We know nothing as yet of the conspiracy, monsieur; all thepapers found have been sealed up and placed on your desk.The prisoner himself is named Edmond Dantes, mate on boardthe three-master the Pharaon, trading in cotton withAlexandria and Smyrna, and belonging to Morrel & Son, ofMarseilles."

　　"Before he entered the merchant service, had he ever servedin the marines?"

　　"Oh, no, monsieur, he is very young."

　　"How old?"

　　"Nineteen or twenty at the most."

　　At this moment, and as Villefort had arrived at the cornerof the Rue des Conseils, a man, who seemed to have beenwaiting for him, approached; it was M. Morrel.

　　"Ah, M. de Villefort," cried he, "I am delighted to see you.Some of your people have committed the strangest mistake --they have just arrested Edmond Dantes, mate of my vessel."

　　"I know it, monsieur," replied Villefort, "and I am nowgoing to examine him."

　　"Oh," said Morrel, carried away by his friendship, "you donot know him, and I do. He is the most estimable, the mosttrustworthy creature in the world, and I will venture tosay, there is not a better seaman in all the merchantservice. Oh, M. de Villefort, I beseech your indulgence forhim."

　　Villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocraticparty at Marseilles, Morrel to the plebeian; the first was aroyalist, the other suspected of Bonapartism. Villefortlooked disdainfully at Morrel, and replied, --

　　"You are aware, monsieur, that a man may be estimable andtrustworthy in private life, and the best seaman in themerchant service, and yet be, politically speaking, a greatcriminal. Is it not true?"

　　The magistrate laid emphasis on these words, as if he wishedto apply them to the owner himself, while his eyes seemed toplunge into the heart of one who, interceding for another,had himself need of indulgence. Morrel reddened, for his ownconscience was not quite clear on politics; besides, whatDantes had told him of his interview with the grand-marshal,and what the emperor had said to him, embarrassed him. Hereplied, however, --

　　"I entreat you, M. de Villefort, be, as you always are, kindand equitable, and give him back to us soon." This give ussounded revolutionary in the deputy's ears.

　　"Ah, ah," murmured he, "is Dantes then a member of someCarbonari society, that his protector thus employs thecollective form? He was, if I recollect, arrested in atavern, in company with a great many others." Then he added,"Monsieur, you may rest assured I shall perform my dutyimpartially, and that if he be innocent you shall not haveappealed to me in vain; should he, however, be guilty, inthis present epoch, impunity would furnish a dangerousexample, and I must do my duty."

　　As he had now arrived at the door of his own house, whichadjoined the Palais de Justice, he entered, after having,coldly saluted the shipowner, who stood, as if petrified, onthe spot where Villefort had left him. The ante-chamber wasfull of police agents and gendarmes, in the midst of whom,carefully watched, but calm and smiling, stood the prisoner.Villefort traversed the ante-chamber, cast a side glance atDantes, and taking a packet which a gendarme offered him,disappeared, saying, "Bring in the prisoner."

　　Rapid as had been Villefort's glance, it had served to givehim an idea of the man he was about to interrogate. He hadrecognized intelligence in the high forehead, courage in thedark eye and bent brow, and frankness in the thick lips thatshowed a set of pearly teeth. Villefort's first impressionwas favorable; but he had been so often warned to mistrustfirst impulses, that he applied the maxim to the impression,forgetting the difference between the two words. He stifled,therefore, the feelings of compassion that were rising,composed his features, and sat down, grim and sombre, at hisdesk. An instant after Dantes entered. He was pale, but calmand collected, and saluting his judge with easy politeness,looked round for a seat, as if he had been in M. Morrel'ssalon. It was then that he encountered for the first timeVillefort's look, -- that look peculiar to the magistrate,who, while seeming to read the thoughts of others, betraysnothing of his own.

　　"Who and what are you?" demanded Villefort, turning over apile of papers, containing information relative to theprisoner, that a police agent had given to him on his entry,and that, already, in an hour's time, had swelled tovoluminous proportions, thanks to the corrupt espionage ofwhich "the accused" is always made the victim.

　　"My name is Edmond Dantes," replied the young man calmly; "Iam mate of the Pharaon, belonging to Messrs. Morrel & Son."

　　"Your age?" continued Villefort.

　　"Nineteen," returned Dantes.

　　"What were you doing at the moment you were arrested?"

　　"I was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur," said theyoung man, his voice slightly tremulous, so great was thecontrast between that happy moment and the painful ceremonyhe was now undergoing; so great was the contrast between thesombre aspect of M. de Villefort and the radiant face ofMercedes.

　　"You were at the festival of your marriage?" said thedeputy, shuddering in spite of himself.

　　"Yes, monsieur; I am on the point of marrying a young girl Ihave been attached to for three years." Villefort, impassiveas he was, was struck with this coincidence; and thetremulous voice of Dantes, surprised in the midst of hishappiness, struck a sympathetic chord in his own bosom -- healso was on the point of being married, and he was summonedfrom his own happiness to destroy that of another. "Thisphilosophic reflection," thought he, "will make a greatsensation at M. de Saint-Meran's;" and he arranged mentally,while Dantes awaited further questions, the antithesis bywhich orators often create a reputation for eloquence. Whenthis speech was arranged, Villefort turned to Dantes.

　　"Go on, sir," said he.

　　"What would you have me say?"

　　"Give all the information in your power."

　　"Tell me on which point you desire information, and I willtell all I know; only," added he, with a smile, "I warn youI know very little."

　　"Have you served under the usurper?"

　　"I was about to be mustered into the Royal Marines when hefell."

　　"It is reported your political opinions are extreme," saidVillefort, who had never heard anything of the kind, but wasnot sorry to make this inquiry, as if it were an accusation.

　　"My political opinions!" replied Dantes. "Alas, sir, I neverhad any opinions. I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; Ihave no part to play. If I obtain the situation I desire, Ishall owe it to M. Morrel. Thus all my opinions -- I willnot say public, but private -- are confined to these threesentiment, -- I love my father, I respect M. Morrel, and Iadore Mercedes. This, sir, is all I can tell you, and yousee how uninteresting it is." As Dantes spoke, Villefortgazed at his ingenuous and open countenance, and recollectedthe words of Renee, who, without knowing who the culpritwas, had besought his indulgence for him. With the deputy'sknowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young manuttered convinced him more and more of his innocence. Thislad, for he was scarcely a man, -- simple, natural, eloquentwith that eloquence of the heart never found when soughtfor; full of affection for everybody, because he was happy,and because happiness renders even the wicked good --extended his affection even to his judge, spite ofVillefort's severe look and stern accent. Dantes seemed fullof kindness.

　　"Pardieu," said Villefort, "he is a noble fellow. I hope Ishall gain Renee's favor easily by obeying the first commandshe ever imposed on me. I shall have at least a pressure ofthe hand in public, and a sweet kiss in private." Full ofthis idea, Villefort's face became so joyous, that when heturned to Dantes, the latter, who had watched the change onhis physiognomy, was smiling also.

　　"Sir," said Villefort, "have you any enemies, at least, thatyou know."

　　"I have enemies?" replied Dantes; "my position is notsufficiently elevated for that. As for my disposition, thatis, perhaps, somewhat too hasty; but I have striven torepress it. I have had ten or twelve sailors under me, andif you question them, they will tell you that they love andrespect me, not as a father, for I am too young, but as anelder brother."

　　"But you may have excited jealousy. You are about to becomecaptain at nineteen -- an elevated post; you are about tomarry a pretty girl, who loves you; and these two pieces ofgood fortune may have excited the envy of some one."

　　"You are right; you know men better than I do, and what yousay may possibly be the case, I confess; but if such personsare among my acquaintances I prefer not to know it, becausethen I should be forced to hate them."

　　"You are wrong; you should always strive to see clearlyaround you. You seem a worthy young man; I will depart fromthe strict line of my duty to aid you in discovering theauthor of this accusation. Here is the paper; do you knowthe writing?" As he spoke, Villefort drew the letter fromhis pocket, and presented it to Dantes. Dantes read it. Acloud passed over his brow as he said, --

　　"No, monsieur, I do not know the writing, and yet it istolerably plain. Whoever did it writes well. I am veryfortunate," added he, looking gratefully at Villefort, "tobe examined by such a man as you; for this envious person isa real enemy." And by the rapid glance that the young man'seyes shot forth, Villefort saw how much energy lay hidbeneath this mildness.

　　"Now," said the deputy, "answer me frankly, not as aprisoner to a judge, but as one man to another who takes aninterest in him, what truth is there in the accusationcontained in this anonymous letter?" And Villefort threwdisdainfully on his desk the letter Dantes had just givenback to him.

　　"None at all. I will tell you the real facts. I swear by myhonor as a sailor, by my love for Mercedes, by the life ofmy father" --

　　"Speak, monsieur," said Villefort. Then, internally, "IfRenee could see me, I hope she would be satisfied, and wouldno longer call me a decapitator."

　　"Well, when we quitted Naples, Captain Leclere was attackedwith a brain fever. As we had no doctor on board, and he wasso anxious to arrive at Elba, that he would not touch at anyother port, his disorder rose to such a height, that at theend of the third day, feeling he was dying, he called me tohim. `My dear Dantes,' said he, `swear to perform what I amgoing to tell you, for it is a matter of the deepestimportance.'

　　"`I swear, captain,' replied I.

　　"`Well, as after my death the command devolves on you asmate, assume the command, and bear up for the Island ofElba, disembark at Porto-Ferrajo, ask for the grand-marshal,give him this letter -- perhaps they will give you anotherletter, and charge you with a commission. You willaccomplish what I was to have done, and derive all the honorand profit from it.'

　　"`I will do it, captain; but perhaps I shall not be admittedto the grand marshal's presence as easily as you expect?'

　　"`Here is a ring that will obtain audience of him, andremove every difficulty,' said the captain. At these wordshe gave me a ring. It was time -- two hours after he wasdelirious; the next day he died."

　　"And what did you do then?"

　　"What I ought to have done, and what every one would havedone in my place. Everywhere the last requests of a dyingman are sacred; but with a sailor the last requests of hissuperior are commands. I sailed for the Island of Elba,where I arrived the next day; I ordered everybody to remainon board, and went on shore alone. As I had expected, Ifound some difficulty in obtaining access to thegrand-marshal; but I sent the ring I had received from thecaptain to him, and was instantly admitted. He questioned meconcerning Captain Leclere's death; and, as the latter hadtold me, gave me a letter to carry on to a person in Paris.I undertook it because it was what my captain had bade medo. I landed here, regulated the affairs of the vessel, andhastened to visit my affianced bride, whom I found morelovely than ever. Thanks to M. Morrel, all the forms weregot over; in a word I was, as I told you, at mymarriage-feast; and I should have been married in an hour,and to-morrow I intended to start for Paris, had I not beenarrested on this charge which you as well as I now see to beunjust."

　　"Ah," said Villefort, "this seems to me the truth. If youhave been culpable, it was imprudence, and this imprudencewas in obedience to the orders of your captain. Give up thisletter you have brought from Elba, and pass your word youwill appear should you be required, and go and rejoin yourfriends.

　　"I am free, then, sir?" cried Dantes joyfully.

　　"Yes; but first give me this letter."

　　"You have it already, for it was taken from me with someothers which I see in that packet."

　　"Stop a moment," said the deputy, as Dantes took his hat andgloves. "To whom is it addressed?"

　　"To Monsieur Noirtier, Rue Coq-Heron, Paris." Had athunderbolt fallen into the room, Villefort could not havebeen more stupefied. He sank into his seat, and hastilyturning over the packet, drew forth the fatal letter, atwhich he glanced with an expression of terror.

　　"M. Noirtier, Rue Coq-Heron, No. 13," murmured he, growingstill paler.

　　"Yes," said Dantes; "do you know him?"

　　"No," replied Villefort; "a faithful servant of the kingdoes not know conspirators."

　　"It is a conspiracy, then?" asked Dantes, who afterbelieving himself free, now began to feel a tenfold alarm."I have, however, already told you, sir, I was entirelyignorant of the contents of the letter."

　　"Yes; but you knew the name of the person to whom it wasaddressed," said Villefort.

　　"I was forced to read the address to know to whom to giveit."

　　"Have you shown this letter to any one?" asked Villefort,becoming still more pale.

　　"To no one, on my honor."

　　"Everybody is ignorant that you are the bearer of a letterfrom the Island of Elba, and addressed to M. Noirtier?"

　　"Everybody, except the person who gave it to me."

　　"And that was too much, far too much," murmured Villefort.Villefort's brow darkened more and more, his white lips andclinched teeth filled Dantes with apprehension. Afterreading the letter, Villefort covered his face with hishands.

　　"Oh," said Dantes timidly, "what is the matter?" Villefortmade no answer, but raised his head at the expiration of afew seconds, and again perused the letter.

　　"And you say that you are ignorant of the contents of thisletter?"

　　"I give you my word of honor, sir," said Dantes; "but whatis the matter? You are ill -- shall I ring for assistance?-- shall I call?"

　　"No," said Villefort, rising hastily; "stay where you are.It is for me to give orders here, and not you."

　　"Monsieur," replied Dantes proudly, "it was only to summonassistance for you."

　　"I want none; it was a temporary indisposition. Attend toyourself; answer me." Dantes waited, expecting a question,but in vain. Villefort fell back on his chair, passed hishand over his brow, moist with perspiration, and, for thethird time, read the letter.

　　"Oh, if he knows the contents of this!" murmured he, "andthat Noirtier is the father of Villefort, I am lost!" And hefixed his eyes upon Edmond as if he would have penetratedhis thoughts.

　　"Oh, it is impossible to doubt it," cried he, suddenly.

　　"In heaven's name!" cried the unhappy young man, "if youdoubt me, question me; I will answer you." Villefort made aviolent effort, and in a tone he strove to render firm, --

　　"Sir," said he, "I am no longer able, as I had hoped, torestore you immediately to liberty; before doing so, I mustconsult the trial justice; what my own feeling is youalready know."

　　"Oh, monsieur," cried Dantes, "you have been rather a friendthan a judge."

　　"Well, I must detain you some time longer, but I will striveto make it as short as possible. The principal chargeagainst you is this letter, and you see" -- Villefortapproached the fire, cast it in, and waited until it wasentirely consumed.

　　"You see, I destroy it?"

　　"Oh," exclaimed Dantes, "you are goodness itself."

　　"Listen," continued Villefort; "you can now have confidencein me after what I have done."

　　"Oh, command, and I will obey."

　　"Listen; this is not a command, but advice I give you."

　　"Speak, and I will follow your advice."

　　"I shall detain you until this evening in the Palais deJustice. Should any one else interrogate you, say to himwhat you have said to me, but do not breathe a word of thisletter."

　　"I promise." It was Villefort who seemed to entreat, and theprisoner who reassured him.

　　"You see," continued he, glancing toward the grate, wherefragments of burnt paper fluttered in the flames, "theletter is destroyed; you and I alone know of its existence;should you, therefore, be questioned, deny all knowledge ofit -- deny it boldly, and you are saved."

　　"Be satisfied; I will deny it."

　　"It was the only letter you had?"

　　"It was."

　　"Swear it."

　　"I swear it."

　　Villefort rang. A police agent entered. Villefort whisperedsome words in his ear, to which the officer replied by amotion of his head.

　　"Follow him," said Villefort to Dantes. Dantes salutedVillefort and retired. Hardly had the door closed whenVillefort threw himself half-fainting into a chair.

　　"Alas, alas," murmured he, "if the procureur himself hadbeen at Marseilles I should have been ruined. This accursedletter would have destroyed all my hopes. Oh, my father,must your past career always interfere with my successes?"Suddenly a light passed over his face, a smile played roundhis set mouth, and his haggard eyes were fixed in thought.

　　"This will do," said he, "and from this letter, which mighthave ruined me, I will make my fortune. Now to the work Ihave in hand." And after having assured himself that theprisoner was gone, the deputy procureur hastened to thehouse of his betrothed.

　　Chapter 8The Chateau D'If.

　　The commissary of police, as he traversed the ante-chamber,made a sign to two gendarmes, who placed themselves one onDantes' right and the other on his left. A door thatcommunicated with the Palais de Justice was opened, and theywent through a long range of gloomy corridors, whoseappearance might have made even the boldest shudder. ThePalais de Justice communicated with the prison, -- a sombreedifice, that from its grated windows looks on theclock-tower of the Accoules. After numberless windings,Dantes saw a door with an iron wicket. The commissary tookup an iron mallet and knocked thrice, every blow seeming toDantes as if struck on his heart. The door opened, the twogendarmes gently pushed him forward, and the door closedwith a loud sound behind him. The air he inhaled was nolonger pure, but thick and mephitic, -- he was in prison. Hewas conducted to a tolerably neat chamber, but grated andbarred, and its appearance, therefore, did not greatly alarmhim; besides, the words of Villefort, who seemed to interesthimself so much, resounded still in his ears like a promiseof freedom. It was four o'clock when Dantes was placed inthis chamber. It was, as we have said, the 1st of March, andthe prisoner was soon buried in darkness. The obscurityaugmented the acuteness of his hearing; at the slightestsound he rose and hastened to the door, convinced they wereabout to liberate him, but the sound died away, and Dantessank again into his seat. At last, about ten o'clock, andjust as Dantes began to despair, steps were heard in thecorridor, a key turned in the lock, the bolts creaked, themassy oaken door flew open, and a flood of light from twotorches pervaded the apartment. By the torchlight Dantes sawthe glittering sabres and carbines of four gendarmes. He hadadvanced at first, but stopped at the sight of this displayof force.

　　"Are you come to fetch me?" asked he.

　　"Yes," replied a gendarme.

　　"By the orders of the deputy procureur?"

　　"I believe so." The conviction that they came from M. deVillefort relieved all Dantes' apprehensions; he advancedcalmly, and placed himself in the centre of the escort. Acarriage waited at the door, the coachman was on the box,and a police officer sat beside him.

　　"Is this carriage for me?" said Dantes.

　　"It is for you," replied a gendarme.

　　Dantes was about to speak; but feeling himself urgedforward, and having neither the power nor the intention toresist, he mounted the steps, and was in an instant seatedinside between two gendarmes; the two others took theirplaces opposite, and the carriage rolled heavily over thestones.

　　The prisoner glanced at the windows -- they were grated; hehad changed his prison for another that was conveying him heknew not whither. Through the grating, however, Dantes sawthey were passing through the Rue Caisserie, and by the RueSaint-Laurent and the Rue Taramis, to the port. Soon he sawthe lights of La Consigne.

　　The carriage stopped, the officer descended, approached theguardhouse, a dozen soldiers came out and formed themselvesin order; Dantes saw the reflection of their muskets by thelight of the lamps on the quay.

　　"Can all this force be summoned on my account?" thought he.

　　The officer opened the door, which was locked, and, withoutspeaking a word, answered Dantes' question; for he sawbetween the ranks of the soldiers a passage formed from thecarriage to the port. The two gendarmes who were opposite tohim descended first, then he was ordered to alight and thegendarmes on each side of him followed his example. Theyadvanced towards a boat, which a custom-house officer heldby a chain, near the quay.

　　The soldiers looked at Dantes with an air of stupidcuriosity. In an instant he was placed in the stern-sheetsof the boat, between the gendarmes, while the officerstationed himself at the bow; a shove sent the boat adrift,and four sturdy oarsmen impelled it rapidly towards thePilon. At a shout from the boat, the chain that closes themouth of the port was lowered and in a second they were, asDantes knew, in the Frioul and outside the inner harbor.

　　The prisoner's first feeling was of joy at again breathingthe pure air -- for air is freedom; but he soon sighed, forhe passed before La Reserve, where he had that morning beenso happy, and now through the open windows came the laughterand revelry of a ball. Dantes folded his hands, raised hiseyes to heaven, and prayed fervently.

　　The boat continued her voyage. They had passed the Tete deMorte, were now off the Anse du Pharo, and about to doublethe battery. This manoeuvre was incomprehensible to Dantes.

　　"Whither are you taking me?" asked he.

　　"You will soon know."

　　"But still" --

　　"We are forbidden to give you any explanation." Dantes,trained in discipline, knew that nothing would be moreabsurd than to question subordinates, who were forbidden toreply; and so he remained silent.

　　The most vague and wild thoughts passed through his mind.The boat they were in could not make a long voyage; therewas no vessel at anchor outside the harbor; he thought,perhaps, they were going to leave him on some distant point.He was not bound, nor had they made any attempt to handcuffhim; this seemed a good augury. Besides, had not the deputy,who had been so kind to him, told him that provided he didnot pronounce the dreaded name of Noirtier, he had nothingto apprehend? Had not Villefort in his presence destroyedthe fatal letter, the only proof against him?

　　He waited silently, striving to pierce through the darkness.

　　They had left the Ile Ratonneau, where the lighthouse stood,on the right, and were now opposite the Point des Catalans.It seemed to the prisoner that he could distinguish afeminine form on the beach, for it was there Mercedes dwelt.How was it that a presentiment did not warn Mercedes thather lover was within three hundred yards of her?

　　One light alone was visible; and Dantes saw that it camefrom Mercedes' chamber. Mercedes was the only one awake inthe whole settlement. A loud cry could be heard by her. Butpride restrained him and he did not utter it. What would hisguards think if they heard him shout like a madman?

　　He remained silent, his eyes fixed upon the light; the boatwent on, but the prisoner thought only of Mercedes. Anintervening elevation of land hid the light. Dantes turnedand perceived that they had got out to sea. While he hadbeen absorbed in thought, they had shipped their oars andhoisted sail; the boat was now moving with the wind.

　　In spite of his repugnance to address the guards, Dantesturned to the nearest gendarme, and taking his hand, --

　　"Comrade," said he, "I adjure you, as a Christian and asoldier, to tell me where we are going. I am Captain Dantes,a loyal Frenchman, thought accused of treason; tell me whereyou are conducting me, and I promise you on my honor I willsubmit to my fate."

　　The gendarme looked irresolutely at his companion, whoreturned for answer a sign that said, "I see no great harmin telling him now," and the gendarme replied, --

　　"You are a native of Marseilles, and a sailor, and yet youdo not know where you are going?"

　　"On my honor, I have no idea."

　　"Have you no idea whatever?"

　　"None at all."

　　"That is impossible."

　　"I swear to you it is true. Tell me, I entreat."

　　"But my orders."

　　"Your orders do not forbid your telling me what I must knowin ten minutes, in half an hour, or an hour. You see Icannot escape, even if I intended."

　　"Unless you are blind, or have never been outside theharbor, you must know."

　　"I do not."

　　"Look round you then." Dantes rose and looked forward, whenhe saw rise within a hundred yards of him the black andfrowning rock on which stands the Chateau d'If. This gloomyfortress, which has for more than three hundred yearsfurnished food for so many wild legends, seemed to Danteslike a scaffold to a malefactor.

　　"The Chateau d'If?" cried he, "what are we going there for?"The gendarme smiled.

　　"I am not going there to be imprisoned," said Dantes; "it isonly used for political prisoners. I have committed nocrime. Are there any magistrates or judges at the Chateaud'If?"

　　"There are only," said the gendarme, "a governor, agarrison, turnkeys, and good thick walls. Come, come, do notlook so astonished, or you will make me think you arelaughing at me in return for my good nature." Dantes pressedthe gendarme's hand as though he would crush it.

　　"You think, then," said he, "that I am taken to the Chateaud'If to be imprisoned there?"

　　"It is probable; but there is no occasion to squeeze sohard."

　　"Without any inquiry, without any formality?"

　　"All the formalities have been gone through; the inquiry isalready made."

　　"And so, in spite of M. de Villefort's promises?"

　　"I do not know what M. de Villefort promised you," said thegendarme, "but I know we are taking you to the Chateau d'If.But what are you doing? Help, comrades, help!"

　　By a rapid movement, which the gendarme's practiced eye hadperceived, Dantes sprang forward to precipitate himself intothe sea; but four vigorous arms seized him as his feetquitted the bottom of the boat. He fell back cursing withrage.

　　"Good!" said the gendarme, placing his knee on his chest;"believe soft-spoken gentlemen again! Harkye, my friend, Ihave disobeyed my first order, but I will not disobey thesecond; and if you move, I will blow your brains out." Andhe levelled his carbine at Dantes, who felt the muzzleagainst his temple.

　　For a moment the idea of struggling crossed his mind, and ofso ending the unexpected evil that had overtaken him. But hebethought him of M. de Villefort's promise; and, besides,death in a boat from the hand of a gendarme seemed tooterrible. He remained motionless, but gnashing his teeth andwringing his hands with fury.

　　At this moment the boat came to a landing with a violentshock. One of the sailors leaped on shore, a cord creaked asit ran through a pulley, and Dantes guessed they were at theend of the voyage, and that they were mooring the boat.

　　His guards, taking him by the arms and coat-collar, forcedhim to rise, and dragged him towards the steps that lead tothe gate of the fortress, while the police officer carryinga musket with fixed bayonet followed behind.

　　Dantes made no resistance; he was like a man in a dream: hesaw soldiers drawn up on the embankment; he knew vaguelythat he was ascending a flight of steps; he was consciousthat he passed through a door, and that the door closedbehind him; but all this indistinctly as through a mist. Hedid not even see the ocean, that terrible barrier againstfreedom, which the prisoners look upon with utter despair.

　　They halted for a minute, during which he strove to collecthis thoughts. He looked around; he was in a court surroundedby high walls; he heard the measured tread of sentinels, andas they passed before the light he saw the barrels of theirmuskets shine.

　　They waited upwards of ten minutes. Certain Dantes could notescape, the gendarmes released him. They seemed awaitingorders. The orders came.

　　"Where is the prisoner?" said a voice.

　　"Here," replied the gendarmes.

　　"Let him follow me; I will take him to his cell."

　　"Go!" said the gendarmes, thrusting Dantes forward.

　　The prisoner followed his guide, who led him into a roomalmost under ground, whose bare and reeking walls seemed asthough impregnated with tears; a lamp placed on a stoolillumined the apartment faintly, and showed Dantes thefeatures of his conductor, an under-jailer, ill-clothed, andof sullen appearance.

　　"Here is your chamber for to-night," said he. "It is late,and the governor is asleep. To-morrow, perhaps, he maychange you. In the meantime there is bread, water, and freshstraw; and that is all a prisoner can wish for. Goodnight."And before Dantes could open his mouth -- before he hadnoticed where the jailer placed his bread or the water --before he had glanced towards the corner where the strawwas, the jailer disappeared, taking with him the lamp andclosing the door, leaving stamped upon the prisoner's mindthe dim reflection of the dripping walls of his dungeon.

　　Dantes was alone in darkness and in silence -- cold as theshadows that he felt breathe on his burning forehead. Withthe first dawn of day the jailer returned, with orders toleave Dantes where he was. He found the prisoner in the sameposition, as if fixed there, his eyes swollen with weeping.He had passed the night standing, and without sleep. Thejailer advanced; Dantes appeared not to perceive him. Hetouched him on the shoulder. Edmond started.

　　"Have you not slept?" said the jailer.

　　"I do not know," replied Dantes. The jailer stared.

　　"Are you hungry?" continued he.

　　"I do not know."

　　"Do you wish for anything?"

　　"I wish to see the governor." The jailer shrugged hisshoulders and left the chamber.

　　Dantes followed him with his eyes, and stretched forth hishands towards the open door; but the door closed. All hisemotion then burst forth; he cast himself on the ground,weeping bitterly, and asking himself what crime he hadcommitted that he was thus punished.

　　The day passed thus; he scarcely tasted food, but walkedround and round the cell like a wild beast in its cage. Onethought in particular tormented him: namely, that during hisjourney hither he had sat so still, whereas he might, adozen times, have plunged into the sea, and, thanks to hispowers of swimming, for which he was famous, have gained theshore, concealed himself until the arrival of a Genoese orSpanish vessel, escaped to Spain or Italy, where Mercedesand his father could have joined him. He had no fears as tohow he should live -- good seamen are welcome everywhere. Hespoke Italian like a Tuscan, and Spanish like a Castilian;he would have been free, and happy with Mercedes and hisfather, whereas he was now confined in the Chateau d'If,that impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny ofhis father and Mercedes; and all this because he had trustedto Villefort's promise. The thought was maddening, andDantes threw himself furiously down on his straw. The nextmorning at the same hour, the jailer came again.

　　"Well," said the jailer, "are you more reasonable to-day?"Dantes made no reply.

　　"Come, cheer up; is there anything that I can do for you?"

　　"I wish to see the governor."

　　"I have already told you it was impossible."

　　"Why so?"

　　"Because it is against prison rules, and prisoners must noteven ask for it."

　　"What is allowed, then?"

　　"Better fare, if you pay for it, books, and leave to walkabout."

　　"I do not want books, I am satisfied with my food, and donot care to walk about; but I wish to see the governor."

　　"If you worry me by repeating the same thing, I will notbring you any more to eat."

　　"Well, then," said Edmond, "if you do not, I shall die ofhunger -- that is all."

　　The jailer saw by his tone he would be happy to die; and asevery prisoner is worth ten sous a day to his jailer, hereplied in a more subdued tone.

　　"What you ask is impossible; but if you are very wellbehaved you will be allowed to walk about, and some day youwill meet the governor, and if he chooses to reply, that ishis affair."

　　"But," asked Dantes, "how long shall I have to wait?"

　　"Ah, a month -- six months -- a year."

　　"It is too long a time. I wish to see him at once."

　　"Ah," said the jailer, "do not always brood over what isimpossible, or you will be mad in a fortnight."

　　"You think so?"

　　"Yes; we have an instance here; it was by always offering amillion of francs to the governor for his liberty that anabbe became mad, who was in this chamber before you."

　　"How long has he left it?"

　　"Two years."

　　"Was he liberated, then?"

　　"No; he was put in a dungeon."

　　"Listen!" said Dantes. "I am not an abbe, I am not mad;perhaps I shall be, but at present, unfortunately, I am not.I will make you another offer."

　　"What is that?"

　　"I do not offer you a million, because I have it not; but Iwill give you a hundred crowns if, the first time you go toMarseilles, you will seek out a young girl named Mercedes,at the Catalans, and give her two lines from me."

　　"If I took them, and were detected, I should lose my place,which is worth two thousand francs a year; so that I shouldbe a great fool to run such a risk for three hundred."

　　"Well," said Dantes, "mark this; if you refuse at least totell Mercedes I am here, I will some day hide myself behindthe door, and when you enter I will dash out your brainswith this stool."

　　"Threats!" cried the jailer, retreating and putting himselfon the defensive; "you are certainly going mad. The abbebegan like you, and in three days you will be like him, madenough to tie up; but, fortunately, there are dungeonshere." Dantes whirled the stool round his head.

　　"All right, all right," said the jailer; "all right, sinceyou will have it so. I will send word to the governor."

　　"Very well," returned Dantes, dropping the stool and sittingon it as if he were in reality mad. The jailer went out, andreturned in an instant with a corporal and four soldiers.

　　"By the governor's orders," said he, "conduct the prisonerto the tier beneath."

　　"To the dungeon, then," said the corporal.

　　"Yes; we must put the madman with the madmen." The soldiersseized Dantes, who followed passively.

　　He descended fifteen steps, and the door of a dungeon wasopened, and he was thrust in. The door closed, and Dantesadvanced with outstretched hands until he touched the wall;he then sat down in the corner until his eyes becameaccustomed to the darkness. The jailer was right; Danteswanted but little of being utterly mad.

　　Chapter 9The Evening of the Betrothal.

　　Villefort had, as we have said, hastened back to Madame deSaint-Meran's in the Place du Grand Cours, and on enteringthe house found that the guests whom he had left at tablewere taking coffee in the salon. Renee was, with all therest of the company, anxiously awaiting him, and hisentrance was followed by a general exclamation.

　　"Well, Decapitator, Guardian of the State, Royalist, Brutus,what is the matter?" said one. "Speak out."

　　"Are we threatened with a fresh Reign of Terror?" askedanother.

　　"Has the Corsican ogre broken loose?" cried a third.

　　"Marquise," said Villefort, approaching his futuremother-in-law, "I request your pardon for thus leaving you.Will the marquis honor me by a few moments' privateconversation?"

　　"Ah, it is really a serious matter, then?" asked themarquis, remarking the cloud on Villefort's brow.

　　"So serious that I must take leave of you for a few days;so," added he, turning to Renee, "judge for yourself if itbe not important."

　　"You are going to leave us?" cried Renee, unable to hide heremotion at this unexpected announcement.

　　"Alas," returned Villefort, "I must!"

　　"Where, then, are you going?" asked the marquise.

　　"That, madame, is an official secret; but if you have anycommissions for Paris, a friend of mine is going thereto-night, and will with pleasure undertake them." The guestslooked at each other.

　　"You wish to speak to me alone?" said the marquis.

　　"Yes, let us go to the library, please." The marquis tookhis arm, and they left the salon.

　　"Well," asked he, as soon as they were by themselves, "tellme what it is?"

　　"An affair of the greatest importance, that demands myimmediate presence in Paris. Now, excuse the indiscretion,marquis, but have you any landed property?"

　　"All my fortune is in the funds; seven or eight hundredthousand francs."

　　"Then sell out -- sell out, marquis, or you will lose itall."

　　"But how can I sell out here?"

　　"You have it broker, have you not?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then give me a letter to him, and tell him to sell outwithout an instant's delay, perhaps even now I shall arrivetoo late."

　　"The deuce you say!" replied the marquis, "let us lose notime, then!"

　　And, sitting down, he wrote a letter to his broker, orderinghim to sell out at the market price.

　　"Now, then," said Villefort, placing the letter in hispocketbook, "I must have another!"

　　"To whom?"

　　"To the king."

　　"To the king?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I dare not write to his majesty."

　　"I do not ask you to write to his majesty, but ask M. deSalvieux to do so. I want a letter that will enable me toreach the king's presence without all the formalities ofdemanding an audience; that would occasion a loss ofprecious time."

　　"But address yourself to the keeper of the seals; he has theright of entry at the Tuileries, and can procure youaudience at any hour of the day or night."

　　"Doubtless; but there is no occasion to divide the honors ofmy discovery with him. The keeper would leave me in thebackground, and take all the glory to himself. I tell you,marquis, my fortune is made if I only reach the Tuileriesthe first, for the king will not forget the service I dohim."

　　"In that case go and get ready. I will call Salvieux andmake him write the letter."

　　"Be as quick as possible, I must be on the road in a quarterof an hour."

　　"Tell your coachman to stop at the door."

　　"You will present my excuses to the marquise andMademoiselle Renee, whom I leave on such a day with greatregret."

　　"You will find them both here, and can make your farewellsin person."

　　"A thousand thanks -- and now for the letter."

　　The marquis rang, a servant entered.

　　"Say to the Comte de Salvieux that I would like to see him."

　　"Now, then, go," said the marquis.

　　"I shall be gone only a few moments."

　　Villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting thatthe sight of the deputy procureur running through thestreets would be enough to throw the whole city intoconfusion, he resumed his ordinary pace. At his door heperceived a figure in the shadow that seemed to wait forhim. It was Mercedes, who, hearing no news of her lover, hadcome unobserved to inquire after him.

　　As Villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him.Dantes had spoken of Mercedes, and Villefort instantlyrecognized her. Her beauty and high bearing surprised him,and when she inquired what had become of her lover, itseemed to him that she was the judge, and he the accused.

　　"The young man you speak of," said Villefort abruptly, "is agreat criminal. and I can do nothing for him, mademoiselle."Mercedes burst into tears, and, as Villefort strove to passher, again addressed him.

　　"But, at least, tell me where he is, that I may know whetherhe is alive or dead," said she.

　　"I do not know; he is no longer in my hands," repliedVillefort.

　　And desirous of putting an end to the interview, he pushedby her, and closed the door, as if to exclude the pain hefelt. But remorse is not thus banished; like Virgil'swounded hero, he carried the arrow in his wound, and,arrived at the salon, Villefort uttered a sigh that wasalmost a sob, and sank into a chair.

　　Then the first pangs of an unending torture seized upon hisheart. The man he sacrificed to his ambition, that innocentvictim immolated on the altar of his father's faults,appeared to him pale and threatening, leading his affiancedbride by the hand, and bringing with him remorse, not suchas the ancients figured, furious and terrible, but that slowand consuming agony whose pangs are intensified from hour tohour up to the very moment of death. Then he had a moment'shesitation. He had frequently called for capital punishmenton criminals, and owing to his irresistible eloquence theyhad been condemned, and yet the slightest shadow of remorsehad never clouded Villefort's brow, because they wereguilty; at least, he believed so; but here was an innocentman whose happiness he had destroyed: in this case he wasnot the judge, but the executioner.

　　As he thus reflected, he felt the sensation we havedescribed, and which had hitherto been unknown to him, arisein his bosom, and fill him with vague apprehensions. It isthus that a wounded man trembles instinctively at theapproach of the finger to his wound until it be healed, butVillefort's was one of those that never close, or if theydo, only close to reopen more agonizing than ever. If atthis moment the sweet voice of Renee had sounded in his earspleading for mercy, or the fair Mercedes had entered andsaid, "In the name of God, I conjure you to restore me myaffianced husband," his cold and trembling hands would havesigned his release; but no voice broke the stillness of thechamber, and the door was opened only by Villefort's valet,who came to tell him that the travelling carriage was inreadiness.

　　Villefort rose, or rather sprang, from his chair, hastilyopened one of the drawers of his desk, emptied all the goldit contained into his pocket, stood motionless an instant,his hand pressed to his head, muttered a few inarticulatesounds, and then, perceiving that his servant had placed hiscloak on his shoulders, he sprang into the carriage,ordering the postilions to drive to M. de Saint-Meran's. Thehapless Dantes was doomed.

　　As the marquis had promised, Villefort found the marquiseand Renee in waiting. He started when he saw Renee, for hefancied she was again about to plead for Dantes. Alas, heremotions were wholly personal: she was thinking only ofVillefort's departure.

　　She loved Villefort, and he left her at the moment he wasabout to become her husband. Villefort knew not when heshould return, and Renee, far from pleading for Dantes,hated the man whose crime separated her from her lover.

　　Meanwhile what of Mercedes? She had met Fernand at thecorner of the Rue de la Loge; she had returned to theCatalans, and had despairingly cast herself on her couch.Fernand, kneeling by her side, took her hand, and covered itwith kisses that Mercedes did not even feel. She passed thenight thus. The lamp went out for want of oil, but she paidno heed to the darkness, and dawn came, but she knew notthat it was day. Grief had made her blind to all but oneobject -- that was Edmond.

　　"Ah, you are there," said she, at length, turning towardsFernand.

　　"I have not quitted you since yesterday," returned Fernandsorrowfully.

　　M. Morrel had not readily given up the fight. He had learnedthat Dantes had been taken to prison, and he had gone to allhis friends, and the influential persons of the city; butthe report was already in circulation that Dantes wasarrested as a Bonapartist agent; and as the most sanguinelooked upon any attempt of Napoleon to remount the throne asimpossible, he met with nothing but refusal, and hadreturned home in despair, declaring that the matter wasserious and that nothing more could be done.

　　Caderousse was equally restless and uneasy, but instead ofseeking, like M. Morrel, to aid Dantes, he had shut himselfup with two bottles of black currant brandy, in the hope ofdrowning reflection. But he did not succeed, and became toointoxicated to fetch any more drink, and yet not sointoxicated as to forget what had happened. With his elbowson the table he sat between the two empty bottles, whilespectres danced in the light of the unsnuffed candle --spectres such as Hoffmann strews over his punch-drenchedpages, like black, fantastic dust.

　　Danglars alone was content and joyous -- he had got rid ofan enemy and made his own situation on the Pharaon secure.Danglars was one of those men born with a pen behind theear, and an inkstand in place of a heart. Everything withhim was multiplication or subtraction. The life of a man wasto him of far less value than a numeral, especially when, bytaking it away, he could increase the sum total of his owndesires. He went to bed at his usual hour, and slept inpeace.

　　Villefort, after having received M. de Salvieux' letter,embraced Renee, kissed the marquise's hand, and shaken thatof the marquis, started for Paris along the Aix road.

　　Old Dantes was dying with anxiety to know what had become ofEdmond. But we know very well what had become of Edmond.

　　Chapter 10The King's Closet at the Tuileries.

　　We will leave Villefort on the road to Paris, travelling --thanks to trebled fees -- with all speed, and passingthrough two or three apartments, enter at the Tuileries thelittle room with the arched window, so well known as havingbeen the favorite closet of Napoleon and Louis XVIII., andnow of Louis Philippe.

　　There, seated before a walnut table he had brought with himfrom Hartwell, and to which, from one of those fancies notuncommon to great people, he was particularly attached, theking, Louis XVIII., was carelessly listening to a man offifty or fifty-two years of age, with gray hair,aristocratic bearing, and exceedingly gentlemanly attire,and meanwhile making a marginal note in a volume ofGryphius's rather inaccurate, but much sought-after, editionof Horace -- a work which was much indebted to the sagaciousobservations of the philosophical monarch.

　　"You say, sir" -- said the king.

　　"That I am exceedingly disquieted, sire."

　　"Really, have you had a vision of the seven fat kine and theseven lean kine?"

　　"No, sire, for that would only betoken for us seven years ofplenty and seven years of scarcity; and with a king as fullof foresight as your majesty, scarcity is not a thing to befeared."

　　"Then of what other scourge are you afraid, my dear Blacas?"

　　"Sire, I have every reason to believe that a storm isbrewing in the south."

　　"Well, my dear duke," replied Louis XVIII., "I think you arewrongly informed, and know positively that, on the contrary,it is very fine weather in that direction." Man of abilityas he was, Louis XVIII. liked a pleasant jest.

　　"Sire," continued M. de Blacas, "if it only be to reassure afaithful servant, will your majesty send into Languedoc,Provence, and Dauphine, trusty men, who will bring you backa faithful report as to the feeling in these threeprovinces?"

　　"Caninus surdis," replied the king, continuing theannotations in his Horace.

　　"Sire," replied the courtier, laughing, in order that hemight seem to comprehend the quotation, "your majesty may beperfectly right in relying on the good feeling of France,but I fear I am not altogether wrong in dreading somedesperate attempt."

　　"By whom?"

　　"By Bonaparte, or, at least, by his adherents."

　　"My dear Blacas," said the king, "you with your alarmsprevent me from working."

　　"And you, sire, prevent me from sleeping with yoursecurity."

　　"Wait, my dear sir, wait a moment; for I have such adelightful note on the Pastor quum traheret -- wait, and Iwill listen to you afterwards."

　　There was a brief pause, during which Louis XVIII. wrote, ina hand as small as possible, another note on the margin ofhis Horace, and then looking at the duke with the air of aman who thinks he has an idea of his own, while he is onlycommenting upon the idea of another, said, --

　　"Go on, my dear duke, go on -- I listen."

　　"Sire," said Blacas, who had for a moment the hope ofsacrificing Villefort to his own profit, "I am compelled totell you that these are not mere rumors destitute offoundation which thus disquiet me; but a serious-minded man,deserving all my confidence, and charged by me to watch overthe south" (the duke hesitated as he pronounced thesewords), "has arrived by post to tell me that a great perilthreatens the king, and so I hastened to you, sire."

　　"Mala ducis avi domum," continued Louis XVIII., stillannotating.

　　"Does your majesty wish me to drop the subject?"

　　"By no means, my dear duke; but just stretch out your hand."

　　"Which?"

　　"Whichever you please -- there to the left."

　　"Here, sire?"

　　"l tell you to the left, and you are looking to the right; Imean on my left -- yes, there. You will find yesterday'sreport of the minister of police. But here is M. Dandrehimself;" and M. Dandre, announced by thechamberlain-in-waiting, entered.

　　"Come in," said Louis XVIII., with repressed smile, "comein, Baron, and tell the duke all you know -- the latest newsof M. de Bonaparte; do not conceal anything, howeverserious, -- let us see, the Island of Elba is a volcano, andwe may expect to have issuing thence flaming and bristlingwar -- bella, horrida bella." M. Dandre leaned veryrespectfully on the back of a chair with his two hands, andsaid, --

　　"Has your majesty perused yesterday's report?"

　　"Yes, yes; but tell the duke himself, who cannot findanything, what the report contains -- give him theparticulars of what the usurper is doing in his islet."

　　"Monsieur," said the baron to the duke, "all the servants ofhis majesty must approve of the latest intelligence which wehave from the Island of Elba. Bonaparte" -- M. Dandre lookedat Louis XVIII., who, employed in writing a note, did noteven raise his head. "Bonaparte," continued the baron, "ismortally wearied, and passes whole days in watching hisminers at work at Porto-Longone."

　　"And scratches himself for amusement," added the king.

　　"Scratches himself?" inquired the duke, "what does yourmajesty mean?"

　　"Yes, indeed, my dear duke. Did you forget that this greatman, this hero, this demigod, is attacked with a malady ofthe skin which worries him to death, prurigo?"

　　"And, moreover, my dear duke," continued the minister ofpolice, "we are almost assured that, in a very short time,the usurper will be insane."

　　"Insane?"

　　"Raving mad; his head becomes weaker. Sometimes he weepsbitterly, sometimes laughs boisterously, at other time hepasses hours on the seashore, flinging stones in the waterand when the flint makes `duck-and-drake' five or six times,he appears as delighted as if he had gained another Marengoor Austerlitz. Now, you must agree that these areindubitable symptoms of insanity."

　　"Or of wisdom, my dear baron -- or of wisdom," said LouisXVIII., laughing; "the greatest captains of antiquity amusedthemselves by casting pebbles into the ocean -- seePlutarch's life of Scipio Africanus."

　　M. de Blacas pondered deeply between the confident monarchand the truthful minister. Villefort, who did not choose toreveal the whole secret, lest another should reap all thebenefit of the disclosure, had yet communicated enough tocause him the greatest uneasiness.

　　"Well, well, Dandre," said Louis XVIII., "Blacas is not yetconvinced; let us proceed, therefore, to the usurper'sconversion." The minister of police bowed.

　　"The usurper's conversion!" murmured the duke, looking atthe king and Dandre, who spoke alternately, like Virgil'sshepherds. "The usurper converted!"

　　"Decidedly, my dear duke."

　　"In what way converted?"

　　"To good principles. Tell him all about it, baron."

　　"Why, this is the way of it," said the minister, with thegravest air in the world: "Napoleon lately had a review, andas two or three of his old veterans expressed a desire toreturn to France, he gave them their dismissal, and exhortedthem to `serve the good king.' These were his own words, ofthat I am certain."

　　"Well, Blacas, what think you of this?" inquired the kingtriumphantly, and pausing for a moment from the voluminousscholiast before him.

　　"I say, sire, that the minister of police is greatlydeceived or I am; and as it is impossible it can be theminister of police as he has the guardianship of the safetyand honor of your majesty, it is probable that I am inerror. However, sire, if I might advise, your majesty willinterrogate the person of whom I spoke to you, and I willurge your majesty to do him this honor."

　　"Most willingly, duke; under your auspices I will receiveany person you please, but you must not expect me to be tooconfiding. Baron, have you any report more recent than thisdated the 20th February. -- this is the 4th of March?"

　　"No, sire, but I am hourly expecting one; it may havearrived since I left my office."

　　"Go thither, and if there be none -- well, well," continuedLouis XVIII., "make one; that is the usual way, is it not?"and the king laughed facetiously.

　　"Oh, sire," replied the minister, "we have no occasion toinvent any; every day our desks are loaded with mostcircumstantial denunciations, coming from hosts of peoplewho hope for some return for services which they seek torender, but cannot; they trust to fortune, and rely uponsome unexpected event in some way to justify theirpredictions."

　　"Well, sir, go"; said Louis XVIII., "and remember that I amwaiting for you."

　　"I will but go and return, sire; I shall be back in tenminutes."

　　"And I, sire," said M. de Blacas, "will go and find mymessenger."

　　"Wait, sir, wait," said Louis XVIII. "Really, M. de Blacas,I must change your armorial bearings; I will give you aneagle with outstretched wings, holding in its claws a preywhich tries in vain to escape, and bearing this device --Tenax."

　　"Sire, I listen," said De Blacas, biting his nails withimpatience.

　　"I wish to consult you on this passage, `Molli fugiensanhelitu," you know it refers to a stag flying from a wolf.Are you not a sportsman and a great wolf-hunter? Well, then,what do you think of the molli anhelitu?"

　　"Admirable, sire; but my messenger is like the stag yourefer to, for he has posted two hundred and twenty leaguesin scarcely three days."

　　"Which is undergoing great fatigue and anxiety, my dearduke, when we have a telegraph which transmits messages inthree or four hours, and that without getting in the leastout of breath."

　　"Ah, sire, you recompense but badly this poor young man, whohas come so far, and with so much ardor, to give yourmajesty useful information. If only for the sake of M. deSalvieux, who recommends him to me, I entreat your majestyto receive him graciously."

　　"M. de Salvieux, my brother's chamberlain?"

　　"Yes, sire."

　　"He is at Marseilles."

　　"And writes me thence."

　　"Does he speak to you of this conspiracy?"

　　"No; but strongly recommends M. de Villefort, and begs me topresent him to your majesty."

　　"M. de Villefort!" cried the king, "is the messenger's nameM. de Villefort?"

　　"Yes, sire."

　　"And he comes from Marseilles?"

　　"In person."

　　"Why did you not mention his name at once?" replied theking, betraying some uneasiness.

　　"Sire, I thought his name was unknown to your majesty."

　　"No, no, Blacas; he is a man of strong and elevatedunderstanding, ambitious, too, and, pardieu, you know hisfather's name!"

　　"His father?"

　　"Yes, Noirtier."

　　"Noirtier the Girondin? -- Noirtier the senator?"

　　"He himself."

　　"And your majesty has employed the son of such a man?"

　　"Blacas, my friend, you have but limited comprehension. Itold you Villefort was ambitions, and to attain thisambition Villefort would sacrifice everything, even hisfather."

　　"Then, sire, may I present him?"

　　"This instant, duke! Where is he?"

　　"Waiting below, in my carriage."

　　"Seek him at once."

　　"I hasten to do so." The duke left the royal presence withthe speed of a young man; his really sincere royalism madehim youthful again. Louis XVIII. remained alone, and turninghis eyes on his half-opened Horace, muttered, --

　　"Justum et tenacem propositi virum."

　　M. de Blacas returned as speedily as he had departed, but inthe ante-chamber he was forced to appeal to the king'sauthority. Villefort's dusty garb, his costume, which wasnot of courtly cut, excited the susceptibility of M. deBreze, who was all astonishment at finding that this youngman had the audacity to enter before the king in suchattire. The duke, however, overcame all difficulties with aword -- his majesty's order; and, in spite of theprotestations which the master of ceremonies made for thehonor of his office and principles, Villefort wasintroduced.

　　The king was seated in the same place where the duke hadleft him. On opening the door, Villefort found himselffacing him, and the young magistrate's first impulse was topause.

　　"Come in, M. de Villefort," said the king, "come in."Villefort bowed, and advancing a few steps, waited until theking should interrogate him.

　　"M. de Villefort," said Louis XVIII., "the Duc de Blacasassures me you have some interesting information tocommunicate.

　　"Sire, the duke is right, and I believe your majesty willthink it equally important."

　　"In the first place, and before everything else, sir, is thenews as bad in your opinion as I am asked to believe?"

　　"Sire, I believe it to be most urgent, but I hope, by thespeed I have used, that it is not irreparable."

　　"Speak as fully as you please, sir," said the king, whobegan to give way to the emotion which had showed itself inBlacas's face and affected Villefort's voice. "Speak, sir,and pray begin at the beginning; I like order ineverything."

　　"Sire," said Villefort, "I will render a faithful report toyour majesty, but I must entreat your forgiveness if myanxiety leads to some obscurity in my language." A glance atthe king after this discreet and subtle exordium, assuredVillefort of the benignity of his august auditor, and hewent on: --

　　"Sire, I have come as rapidly to Paris as possible, toinform your majesty that I have discovered, in the exerciseof my duties, not a commonplace and insignificant plot, suchas is every day got up in the lower ranks of the people andin the army, but an actual conspiracy -- a storm whichmenaces no less than your majesty's throne. Sire, theusurper is arming three ships, he meditates some project,which, however mad, is yet, perhaps, terrible. At thismoment he will have left Elba, to go whither I know not, butassuredly to attempt a landing either at Naples, or on thecoast of Tuscany, or perhaps on the shores of France. Yourmajesty is well aware that the sovereign of the Island ofElba has maintained his relations with Italy and France?"

　　"I am, sir," said the king, much agitated; "and recently wehave had information that the Bonapartist clubs have hadmeetings in the Rue Saint-Jacques. But proceed, I beg ofyou. How did you obtain these details?"

　　"Sire, they are the results of an examination which I havemade of a man of Marseilles, whom I have watched for sometime, and arrested on the day of my departure. This person,a sailor, of turbulent character, and whom I suspected ofBonapartism, has been secretly to the Island of Elba. Therehe saw the grand-marshal, who charged him with an oralmessage to a Bonapartist in Paris, whose name I could notextract from him; but this mission was to prepare men'sminds for a return (it is the man who says this, sire) -- areturn which will soon occur."

　　"And where is this man?"

　　"In prison, sire."

　　"And the matter seems serious to you?"

　　"So serious, sire, that when the circumstance surprised mein the midst of a family festival, on the very day of mybetrothal, I left my bride and friends, postponingeverything, that I might hasten to lay at your majesty'sfeet the fears which impressed me, and the assurance of mydevotion."

　　"True," said Louis XVIII., "was there not a marriageengagement between you and Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran?"

　　"Daughter of one of your majesty's most faithful servants."

　　"Yes, yes; but let us talk of this plot, M. de Villefort."

　　"Sire, I fear it is more than a plot; I fear it is aconspiracy."

　　"A conspiracy in these times," said Louis XVIII., smiling,"is a thing very easy to meditate, but more difficult toconduct to an end, inasmuch as, re-established so recentlyon the throne of our ancestors, we have our eyes open atonce upon the past, the present, and the future. For thelast ten months my ministers have redoubled their vigilance,in order to watch the shore of the Mediterranean. IfBonaparte landed at Naples, the whole coalition would be onfoot before he could even reach Piomoino; if he land inTuscany, he will be in an unfriendly territory; if he landin France, it must be with a handful of men, and the resultof that is easily foretold, execrated as he is by thepopulation. Take courage, sir; but at the same time rely onour royal gratitude."

　　"Ah, here is M. Dandre!" cried de Blacas. At this instantthe minister of police appeared at the door, pale,trembling, and as if ready to faint. Villefort was about toretire, but M. de Blacas, taking his hand, restrained him.

　　Chapter 11The Corsican Ogre.

　　At the sight of this agitation Louis XVIII. pushed from himviolently the table at which he was sitting.

　　"What ails you, baron?" he exclaimed. "You appear quiteaghast. Has your uneasiness anything to do with what M. deBlacas has told me, and M. de Villefort has just confirmed?"M. de Blacas moved suddenly towards the baron, but thefright of the courtier pleaded for the forbearance of thestatesman; and besides, as matters were, it was much more tohis advantage that the prefect of police should triumph overhim than that he should humiliate the prefect.

　　"Sire" -- stammered the baron.

　　"Well, what is it?" asked Louis XVIII. The minister ofpolice, giving way to an impulse of despair, was about tothrow himself at the feet of Louis XVIII., who retreated astep and frowned.

　　"Will you speak?" he said.

　　"Oh, sire, what a dreadful misfortune! I am, indeed, to bepitied. I can never forgive myself!"

　　"Monsieur," said Louis XVIII., "I command you to speak."

　　"Well, sire, the usurper left Elba on the 26th February, andlanded on the 1st of March."

　　"And where? In Italy?" asked the king eagerly.

　　"In France, sire, -- at a small port, near Antibes, in theGulf of Juan."

　　"The usurper landed in France, near Antibes, in the Gulf ofJuan, two hundred and fifty leagues from Paris, on the 1stof March, and you only acquired this information to-day, the4th of March! Well, sir, what you tell me is impossible. Youmust have received a false report, or you have gone mad."

　　"Alas, sire, it is but too true!" Louis made a gesture ofindescribable anger and alarm, and then drew himself up asif this sudden blow had struck him at the same moment inheart and countenance.

　　"In France!" he cried, "the usurper in France! Then they didnot watch over this man. Who knows? they were, perhaps, inleague with him."

　　"Oh, sire," exclaimed the Duc de Blacas, "M. Dandre is not aman to be accused of treason! Sire, we have all been blind,and the minister of police has shared the general blindness,that is all."

　　"But" -- said Villefort, and then suddenly checking himself,he was silent; then he continued, "Your pardon, sire," hesaid, bowing, "my zeal carried me away. Will your majestydeign to excuse me?"

　　"Speak, sir, speak boldly," replied Louis. "You aloneforewarned us of the evil; now try and aid us with theremedy."

　　"Sire," said Villefort, "the usurper is detested in thesouth; and it seems to me that if he ventured into thesouth, it would be easy to raise Languedoc and Provenceagainst him."

　　"Yes, assuredly," replied the minister; "but he is advancingby Gap and Sisteron."

　　"Advancing -- he is advancing!" said Louis XVIII. "Is hethen advancing on Paris?" The minister of police maintaineda silence which was equivalent to a complete avowal.

　　"And Dauphine, sir?" inquired the king, of Villefort. "Doyou think it possible to rouse that as well as Provence?"

　　"Sire, I am sorry to tell your majesty a cruel fact; but thefeeling in Dauphine is quite the reverse of that in Provenceor Languedoc. The mountaineers are Bonapartists, sire."

　　"Then," murmured Louis, "he was well informed. And how manymen had he with him?"

　　"I do not know, sire," answered the minister of police.

　　"What, you do not know! Have you neglected to obtaininformation on that point? Of course it is of noconsequence," he added, with a withering smile.

　　"Sire, it was impossible to learn; the despatch simplystated the fact of the landing and the route taken by theusurper."

　　"And how did this despatch reach you?" inquired the king.The minister bowed his head, and while a deep coloroverspread his cheeks, he stammered out, --

　　"By the telegraph, sire." -- Louis XVIII. advanced a step,and folded his arms over his chest as Napoleon would havedone.

　　"So then," he exclaimed, turning pale with anger, "sevenconjoined and allied armies overthrew that man. A miracle ofheaven replaced me on the throne of my fathers afterfive-and-twenty years of exile. I have, during thosefive-and-twenty years, spared no pains to understand thepeople of France and the interests which were confided tome; and now, when I see the fruition of my wishes almostwithin reach, the power I hold in my hands bursts, andshatters me to atoms!"

　　"Sire, it is fatality!" murmured the minister, feeling thatthe pressure of circumstances, however light a thing todestiny, was too much for any human strength to endure.

　　"What our enemies say of us is then true. We have learntnothing, forgotten nothing! If I were betrayed as he was, Iwould console myself; but to be in the midst of personselevated by myself to places of honor, who ought to watchover me more carefully than over themselves, -- for myfortune is theirs -- before me they were nothing -- after methey will be nothing, and perish miserably from incapacity-- ineptitude! Oh, yes, sir, you are right -- it isfatality!"

　　The minister quailed before this outburst of sarcasm. M. deBlacas wiped the moisture from his brow. Villefort smiledwithin himself, for he felt his increased importance.

　　"To fall," continued King Louis, who at the first glance hadsounded the abyss on which the monarchy hung suspended, --"to fall, and learn of that fall by telegraph! Oh, I wouldrather mount the scaffold of my brother, Louis XVI., thanthus descend the staircase at the Tuileries driven away byridicule. Ridicule, sir -- why, you know not its power inFrance, and yet you ought to know it!"

　　"Sire, sire," murmured the minister, "for pity's" --

　　"Approach, M. de Villefort," resumed the king, addressingthe young man, who, motionless and breathless, was listeningto a conversation on which depended the destiny of akingdom. "Approach, and tell monsieur that it is possible toknow beforehand all that he has not known."

　　"Sire, it was really impossible to learn secrets which thatman concealed from all the world."

　　"Really impossible! Yes -- that is a great word, sir.Unfortunately, there are great words, as there are greatmen; I have measured them. Really impossible for a ministerwho has an office, agents, spies, and fifteen hundredthousand francs for secret service money, to know what isgoing on at sixty leagues from the coast of France! Well,then, see, here is a gentleman who had none of theseresources at his disposal -- a gentleman, only a simplemagistrate, who learned more than you with all your police,and who would have saved my crown, if, like you, he had the

　　power of directing a telegraph." The look of the minister ofpolice was turned with concentrated spite on Villefort, whobent his head in modest triumph.

　　"I do not mean that for you, Blacas," continued LouisXVIII.; "for if you have discovered nothing, at least youhave had the good sense to persevere in your suspicions. Anyother than yourself would have considered the disclosure ofM. de Villefort insignificant, or else dictated by venalambition," These words were an allusion to the sentimentswhich the minister of police had uttered with so muchconfidence an hour before.

　　Villefort understood the king's intent. Any other personwould, perhaps, have been overcome by such an intoxicatingdraught of praise; but he feared to make for himself amortal enemy of the police minister, although he saw thatDandre was irrevocably lost. In fact, the minister, who, inthe plenitude of his power, had been unable to unearthNapoleon's secret, might in despair at his own downfallinterrogate Dantes and so lay bare the motives ofVillefort's plot. Realizing this, Villefort came to therescue of the crest-fallen minister, instead of aiding tocrush him.

　　"Sire," said Villefort, "the suddenness of this event mustprove to your majesty that the issue is in the hands ofProvidence; what your majesty is pleased to attribute to meas profound perspicacity is simply owing to chance, and Ihave profited by that chance, like a good and devotedservant -- that's all. Do not attribute to me more than Ideserve, sire, that your majesty may never have occasion torecall the first opinion you have been pleased to form ofme." The minister of police thanked the young man by aneloquent look, and Villefort understood that he hadsucceeded in his design; that is to say, that withoutforfeiting the gratitude of the king, he had made a friendof one on whom, in case of necessity, he might rely.

　　"'Tis well," resumed the king. "And now, gentlemen," hecontinued, turning towards M. de Blacas and the minister ofpolice, "I have no further occasion for you, and you mayretire; what now remains to do is in the department of theminister of war."

　　"Fortunately, sire," said M. de Blacas, "we can rely on thearmy; your majesty knows how every report confirms theirloyalty and attachment."

　　"Do not mention reports, duke, to me, for I know now whatconfidence to place in them. Yet, speaking of reports,baron, what have you learned with regard to the affair inthe Rue Saint-Jacques?"

　　"The affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques!" exclaimed Villefort,unable to repress an exclamation. Then, suddenly pausing, headded, "Your pardon, sire, but my devotion to your majestyhas made me forget, not the respect I have, for that is toodeeply engraved in my heart, but the rules of etiquette."

　　"Go on, go on, sir," replied the king; "you have to-dayearned the right to make inquiries here."

　　"Sire," interposed the minister of police, "I came a momentago to give your majesty fresh information which I hadobtained on this head, when your majesty's attention wasattracted by the terrible event that has occurred in thegulf, and now these facts will cease to interest yourmajesty."

　　"On the contrary, sir, -- on the contrary," said LouisXVIII., "this affair seems to me to have a decidedconnection with that which occupies our attention, and thedeath of General Quesnel will, perhaps, put us on the directtrack of a great internal conspiracy." At the name ofGeneral Quesnel, Villefort trembled.

　　"Everything points to the conclusion, sire," said theminister of police, "that death was not the result ofsuicide, as we first believed, but of assassination. GeneralQuesnel, it appears, had just left a Bonapartist club whenhe disappeared. An unknown person had been with him thatmorning, and made an appointment with him in the RueSaint-Jacques; unfortunately, the general's valet, who wasdressing his hair at the moment when the stranger entered,heard the street mentioned, but did not catch the number."As the police minister related this to the king, Villefort,who looked as if his very life hung on the speaker's lips,turned alternately red and pale. The king looked towardshim.

　　"Do you not think with me, M. de Villefort, that GeneralQuesnel, whom they believed attached to the usurper, but whowas really entirely devoted to me, has perished the victimof a Bonapartist ambush?"

　　"It is probable, sire," replied Villefort. "But is this allthat is known?"

　　"They are on the track of the man who appointed the meetingwith him."

　　"On his track?" said Villefort.

　　"Yes, the servant has given his description. He is a man offrom fifty to fifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyescovered with shaggy eyebrows, and a thick mustache. He wasdressed in a blue frock-coat, buttoned up to the chin, andwore at his button-hole the rosette of an officer of theLegion of Honor. Yesterday a person exactly correspondingwith this description was followed, but he was lost sight ofat the corner of the Rue de la Jussienne and the RueCoq-Heron." Villefort leaned on the back of an arm-chair,for as the minister of police went on speaking he felt hislegs bend under him; but when he learned that the unknownhad escaped the vigilance of the agent who followed him, hebreathed again.

　　"Continue to seek for this man, sir," said the king to theminister of police; "for if, as I am all but convinced,General Quesnel, who would have been so useful to us at thismoment, has been murdered, his assassins, Bonapartists ornot, shall be cruelly punished." It required all Villefort'scoolness not to betray the terror with which thisdeclaration of the king inspired him.

　　"How strange," continued the king, with some asperity; "thepolice think that they have disposed of the whole matterwhen they say, `A murder has been committed,' and especiallyso when they can add, `And we are on the track of the guiltypersons.'"

　　"Sire, your majesty will, I trust, be amply satisfied onthis point at least."

　　"We shall see. I will no longer detain you, M. de Villefort,for you must be fatigued after so long a journey; go andrest. Of course you stopped at your father's?" A feeling offaintness came over Villefort.

　　"No, sire," he replied, "I alighted at the Hotel de Madrid,in the Rue de Tournon."

　　"But you have seen him?"

　　"Sire, I went straight to the Duc de Blacas."

　　"But you will see him, then?"

　　"I think not, sire."

　　"Ah, I forgot," said Louis, smiling in a manner which provedthat all these questions were not made without a motive; "Iforgot you and M. Noirtier are not on the best termspossible, and that is another sacrifice made to the royalcause, and for which you should be recompensed."

　　"Sire, the kindness your majesty deigns to evince towards meis a recompense which so far surpasses my utmost ambitionthat I have nothing more to ask for."

　　"Never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mindeasy. In the meanwhile" (the king here detached the cross ofthe Legion of Honor which he usually wore over his bluecoat, near the cross of St. Louis, above the order ofNotre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel and St. Lazare, and gave it toVillefort) -- "in the meanwhile take this cross."

　　"Sire," said Villefort, "your majesty mistakes; this is anofficer's cross."

　　"Ma foi," said Louis XVIII., "take it, such as it is, for Ihave not the time to procure you another. Blacas, let it beyour care to see that the brevet is made out and sent to M.de Villefort." Villefort's eyes were filled with tears ofjoy and pride; he took the cross and kissed it.

　　"And now," he said, "may I inquire what are the orders withwhich your majesty deigns to honor me?"

　　"Take what rest you require, and remember that if you arenot able to serve me here in Paris, you may be of thegreatest service to me at Marseilles."

　　"Sire," replied Villefort, bowing, "in an hour I shall havequitted Paris."

　　"Go, sir," said the king; "and should I forget you (kings'memories are short), do not be afraid to bring yourself tomy recollection. Baron, send for the minister of war.Blacas, remain."

　　"Ah, sir," said the minister of police to Villefort, as theyleft the Tuileries, "you entered by luck's door -- yourfortune is made."

　　"Will it be long first?" muttered Villefort, saluting theminister, whose career was ended, and looking about him fora hackney-coach. One passed at the moment, which he hailed;he gave his address to the driver, and springing in, threwhimself on the seat, and gave loose to dreams of ambition.

　　Ten minutes afterwards Villefort reached his hotel, orderedhorses to be ready in two hours, and asked to have hisbreakfast brought to him. He was about to begin his repastwhen the sound of the bell rang sharp and loud. The valetopened the door, and Villefort heard some one speak hisname.

　　"Who could know that I was here already?" said the youngman. The valet entered.

　　"Well," said Villefort, "what is it? -- Who rang? -- Whoasked for me?"

　　"A stranger who will not send in his name."

　　"A stranger who will not send in his name! What can he wantwith me?"

　　"He wishes to speak to you."

　　"To me?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Did he mention my name?"

　　"Yes."

　　"What sort of person is he?"

　　"Why, sir, a man of about fifty."

　　"Short or tall?"

　　"About your own height, sir."

　　"Dark or fair?"

　　"Dark, -- very dark; with black eyes, black hair, blackeyebrows."

　　"And how dressed?" asked Villefort quickly.

　　"In a blue frock-coat, buttoned up close, decorated with theLegion of Honor."

　　"It is he!" said Villefort, turning pale.

　　"Eh, pardieu," said the individual whose description we havetwice given, entering the door, "what a great deal ofceremony! Is it the custom in Marseilles for sons to keeptheir fathers waiting in their anterooms?"

　　"Father!" cried Villefort, "then I was not deceived; I feltsure it must be you."

　　"Well, then, if you felt so sure," replied the new-comer,putting his cane in a corner and his hat on a chair, "allowme to say, my dear Gerard, that it was not very filial ofyou to keep me waiting at the door."

　　"Leave us, Germain," said Villefort. The servant quitted theapartment with evident signs of astonishment.

　　Chapter 12Father and Son.

　　M. Noirtier -- for it was, indeed, he who entered -- lookedafter the servant until the door was closed, and then,fearing, no doubt, that he might be overheard in theante-chamber, he opened the door again, nor was theprecaution useless, as appeared from the rapid retreat ofGermain, who proved that he was not exempt from the sinwhich ruined our first parents. M. Noirtier then took thetrouble to close and bolt the ante-chamber door, then thatof the bed-chamber, and then extended his hand to Villefort,who had followed all his motions with surprise which hecould not conceal.

　　"Well, now, my dear Gerard," said he to the young man, witha very significant look, "do you know, you seem as if youwere not very glad to see me?"

　　"My dear father," said Villefort, "I am, on the contrary,delighted; but I so little expected your visit, that it hassomewhat overcome me."

　　"But, my dear fellow," replied M. Noirtier, seating himself,"I might say the same thing to you, when you announce to meyour wedding for the 28th of February, and on the 3rd ofMarch you turn up here in Paris."

　　"And if I have come, my dear father," said Gerard, drawingcloser to M. Noirtier, "do not complain, for it is for youthat I came, and my journey will be your salvation."

　　"Ah, indeed!" said M. Noirtier, stretching himself out athis ease in the chair. "Really, pray tell me all about it,for it must be interesting."

　　"Father, you have heard speak of a certain Bonapartist clubin the Rue Saint-Jacques?"

　　"No. 53; yes, I am vice-president."

　　"Father, your coolness makes me shudder."

　　"Why, my dear boy, when a man has been proscribed by themountaineers, has escaped from Paris in a hay-cart, beenhunted over the plains of Bordeaux by Robespierre'sbloodhounds, he becomes accustomed to most things. But goon, what about the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques?"

　　"Why, they induced General Quesnel to go there, and GeneralQuesnel, who quitted his own house at nine o'clock in theevening, was found the next day in the Seine."

　　"And who told you this fine story?"

　　"The king himself."

　　"Well, then, in return for your story," continued Noirtier,"I will tell you another."

　　"My dear father, I think I already know what you are aboutto tell me."

　　"Ah, you have heard of the landing of the emperor?"

　　"Not so loud, father, I entreat of you -- for your own sakeas well as mine. Yes, I heard this news, and knew it evenbefore you could; for three days ago I posted fromMarseilles to Paris with all possible speed, half-desperateat the enforced delay."

　　"Three days ago? You are crazy. Why, three days ago theemperor had not landed."

　　"No matter, I was aware of his intention."

　　"How did you know about it?"

　　"By a letter addressed to you from the Island of Elba."

　　"To me?"

　　"To you; and which I discovered in the pocket-book of themessenger. Had that letter fallen into the hands of another,you, my dear father, would probably ere this have beenshot." Villefort's father laughed.

　　"Come, come," said he, "will the Restoration adopt imperialmethods so promptly? Shot, my dear boy? What an idea! Whereis the letter you speak of? I know you too well to supposeyou would allow such a thing to pass you."

　　"I burnt it, for fear that even a fragment should remain;for that letter must have led to your condemnation."

　　"And the destruction of your future prospects," repliedNoirtier; "yes, I can easily comprehend that. But I havenothing to fear while I have you to protect me."

　　"I do better than that, sir -- I save you."

　　"You do? Why, really, the thing becomes more and moredramatic -- explain yourself."

　　"I must refer again to the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques."

　　"It appears that this club is rather a bore to the police.Why didn't they search more vigilantly? they would havefound" --

　　"They have not found; but they are on the track."

　　"Yes, that the usual phrase; I am quite familiar with it.When the police is at fault, it declares that it is on thetrack; and the government patiently awaits the day when itcomes to say, with a sneaking air, that the track is lost."

　　"Yes, but they have found a corpse; the general has beenkilled, and in all countries they call that a murder."

　　"A murder do you call it? why, there is nothing to provethat the general was murdered. People are found every day inthe Seine, having thrown themselves in, or having beendrowned from not knowing how to swim."

　　"Father, you know very well that the general was not a manto drown himself in despair, and people do not bathe in theSeine in the month of January. No, no, do not be deceived;this was murder in every sense of the word."

　　"And who thus designated it?"

　　"The king himself."

　　"The king! I thought he was philosopher enough to allow thatthere was no murder in politics. In politics, my dearfellow, you know, as well as I do, there are no men, butideas -- no feelings, but interests; in politics we do notkill a man, we only remove an obstacle, that is all. Wouldyou like to know how matters have progressed? Well, I willtell you. It was thought reliance might be placed in GeneralQuesnel; he was recommended to us from the Island of Elba;one of us went to him, and invited him to the RueSaint-Jacques, where he would find some friends. He camethere, and the plan was unfolded to him for leaving Elba,the projected landing, etc. When he had heard andcomprehended all to the fullest extent, he replied that hewas a royalist. Then all looked at each other, -- he wasmade to take an oath, and did so, but with such an ill gracethat it was really tempting Providence to swear him, andyet, in spite of that, the general was allowed to departfree -- perfectly free. Yet he did not return home. Whatcould that mean? why, my dear fellow, that on leaving us helost his way, that's all. A murder? really, Villefort, yousurprise me. You, a deputy procureur, to found an accusationon such bad premises! Did I ever say to you, when you werefulfilling your character as a royalist, and cut off thehead of one of my party, `My son, you have committed amurder?' No, I said, `Very well, sir, you have gained thevictory; to-morrow, perchance, it will be our turn.'"

　　"But, father, take care; when our turn comes, our revengewill be sweeping."

　　"I do not understand you."

　　"You rely on the usurper's return?"

　　"We do."

　　"You are mistaken; he will not advance two leagues into theinterior of France without being followed, tracked, andcaught like a wild beast."

　　"My dear fellow, the emperor is at this moment on the way toGrenoble; on the 10th or 12th he will be at Lyons, and onthe 20th or 25th at Paris."

　　"The people will rise."

　　"Yes, to go and meet him."

　　"He has but a handful of men with him, and armies will bedespatched against him."

　　"Yes, to escort him into the capital. Really, my dearGerard, you are but a child; you think yourself wellinformed because the telegraph has told you, three daysafter the landing, `The usurper has landed at Cannes withseveral men. He is pursued.' But where is he? what is hedoing? You do not know at all, and in this way they willchase him to Paris, without drawing a trigger."

　　"Grenoble and Lyons are faithful cities, and will oppose tohim an impassable barrier."

　　"Grenoble will open her gates to him with enthusiasm -- allLyons will hasten to welcome him. Believe me, we are as wellinformed as you, and our police are as good as your own.Would you like a proof of it? well, you wished to concealyour journey from me, and yet I knew of your arrival half anhour after you had passed the barrier. You gave yourdirection to no one but your postilion, yet I have youraddress, and in proof I am here the very instant you aregoing to sit at table. Ring, then, if you please, for asecond knife, fork, and plate, and we will dine together."

　　"Indeed!" replied Villefort, looking at his father withastonishment, "you really do seem very well informed."

　　"Eh? the thing is simple enough. You who are in power haveonly the means that money produces -- we who are inexpectation, have those which devotion prompts."

　　"Devotion!" said Villefort, with a sneer.

　　"Yes, devotion; for that is, I believe, the phrase forhopeful ambition."

　　And Villefort's father extended his hand to the bell-rope,to summon the servant whom his son had not called. Villefortcaught his arm.

　　"Wait, my dear father," said the young man, "one word more."

　　"Say on."

　　"However stupid the royalist police may be, they do know oneterrible thing."

　　"What is that?"

　　"The description of the man who, on the morning of the daywhen General Quesnel disappeared, presented himself at hishouse."

　　"Oh, the admirable police have found that out, have they?And what may be that description?"

　　"Dark complexion; hair, eyebrows, and whiskers, black; bluefrock-coat, buttoned up to the chin; rosette of an officerof the Legion of Honor in his button-hole; a hat with widebrim, and a cane."

　　"Ah, ha, that's it, is it?" said Noirtier; "and why, then,have they not laid hands on him?"

　　"Because yesterday, or the day before, they lost sight ofhim at the corner of the Rue Coq-Heron."

　　"Didn't I say that your police were good for nothing?"

　　"Yes; but they may catch him yet."

　　"True," said Noirtier, looking carelessly around him, "true,if this person were not on his guard, as he is;" and headded with a smile, "He will consequently make a few changesin his personal appearance." At these words he rose, and putoff his frock-coat and cravat, went towards a table on whichlay his son's toilet articles, lathered his face, took arazor, and, with a firm hand, cut off the compromisingwhiskers. Villefort watched him with alarm not devoid ofadmiration.

　　His whiskers cut off, Noirtier gave another turn to hishair; took, instead of his black cravat, a coloredneckerchief which lay at the top of an open portmanteau; puton, in lieu of his blue and high-buttoned frock-coat, a coatof Villefort's of dark brown, and cut away in front; triedon before the glass a narrow-brimmed hat of his son's, whichappeared to fit him perfectly, and, leaving his cane in thecorner where he had deposited it, he took up a small bambooswitch, cut the air with it once or twice, and walked aboutwith that easy swagger which was one of his principalcharacteristics.

　　"Well," he said, turning towards his wondering son, whenthis disguise was completed, "well, do you think your policewill recognize me now."

　　"No, father," stammered Villefort; "at least, I hope not."

　　"And now, my dear boy," continued Noirtier, "I rely on yourprudence to remove all the things which I leave in yourcare."

　　"Oh, rely on me," said Villefort.

　　"Yes, yes; and now I believe you are right, and that youhave really saved my life; be assured I will return thefavor hereafter." Villefort shook his head.

　　"You are not convinced yet?"

　　"I hope at least, that you may be mistaken."

　　"Shall you see the king again?"

　　"Perhaps."

　　"Would you pass in his eyes for a prophet?"

　　"Prophets of evil are not in favor at the court, father."

　　"True, but some day they do them justice; and supposing asecond restoration, you would then pass for a great man."

　　"Well, what should I say to the king?"

　　"Say this to him: `Sire, you are deceived as to the feelingin France, as to the opinions of the towns, and theprejudices of the army; he whom in Paris you call theCorsican ogre, who at Nevers is styled the usurper, isalready saluted as Bonaparte at Lyons, and emperor atGrenoble. You think he is tracked, pursued, captured; he isadvancing as rapidly as his own eagles. The soldiers youbelieve to be dying with hunger, worn out with fatigue,ready to desert, gather like atoms of snow about the rollingball as it hastens onward. Sire, go, leave France to itsreal master, to him who acquired it, not by purchase, but byright of conquest; go, sire, not that you incur any risk,for your adversary is powerful enough to show you mercy, butbecause it would be humiliating for a grandson of SaintLouis to owe his life to the man of Arcola, Marengo,Austerlitz.' Tell him this, Gerard; or, rather, tell himnothing. Keep your journey a secret; do not boast of whatyou have come to Paris to do, or have done; return with allspeed; enter Marseilles at night, and your house by theback-door, and there remain, quiet, submissive, secret, and,above all, inoffensive; for this time, I swear to you, weshall act like powerful men who know their enemies. Go, myson -- go, my dear Gerard, and by your obedience to mypaternal orders, or, if you prefer it, friendly counsels, wewill keep you in your place. This will be," added Noirtier,with a smile, "one means by which you may a second time saveme, if the political balance should some day take anotherturn, and cast you aloft while hurling me down. Adieu, mydear Gerard, and at your next journey alight at my door."Noirtier left the room when he had finished, with the samecalmness that had characterized him during the whole of thisremarkable and trying conversation. Villefort, pale andagitated, ran to the window, put aside the curtain, and sawhim pass, cool and collected, by two or three ill-lookingmen at the corner of the street, who were there, perhaps, toarrest a man with black whiskers, and a blue frock-coat, andhat with broad brim.

　　Villefort stood watching, breathless, until his father haddisappeared at the Rue Bussy. Then he turned to the variousarticles he had left behind him, put the black cravat andblue frock-coat at the bottom of the portmanteau, threw thehat into a dark closet, broke the cane into small bits andflung it in the fire, put on his travelling-cap, and callinghis valet, checked with a look the thousand questions he wasready to ask, paid his bill, sprang into his carriage, whichwas ready, learned at Lyons that Bonaparte had enteredGrenoble, and in the midst of the tumult which prevailedalong the road, at length reached Marseilles, a prey to allthe hopes and fears which enter into the heart of man withambition and its first successes.

　　Chapter 13The Hundred Days.

　　M. Noirtier was a true prophet, and things progressedrapidly, as he had predicted. Every one knows the history ofthe famous return from Elba, a return which wasunprecedented in the past, and will probably remain withouta counterpart in the future.

　　Louis XVIII. made but a faint attempt to parry thisunexpected blow; the monarchy he had scarcely reconstructedtottered on its precarious foundation, and at a sign fromthe emperor the incongruous structure of ancient prejudicesand new ideas fell to the ground. Villefort, therefore,gained nothing save the king's gratitude (which was ratherlikely to injure him at the present time) and the cross ofthe Legion of Honor, which he had the prudence not to wear,although M. de Blacas had duly forwarded the brevet.

　　Napoleon would, doubtless, have deprived Villefort of hisoffice had it not been for Noirtier, who was all powerful atcourt, and thus the Girondin of '93 and the Senator of 1806protected him who so lately had been his protector. AllVillefort's influence barely enabled him to stifle thesecret Dantes had so nearly divulged. The king's procureuralone was deprived of his office, being suspected ofroyalism.

　　However, scarcely was the imperial power established -- thatis, scarcely had the emperor re-entered the Tuileries andbegun to issue orders from the closet into which we haveintroduced our readers, -- he found on the table there LouisXVIII.'s half-filled snuff-box, -- scarcely had thisoccurred when Marseilles began, in spite of the authorities,to rekindle the flames of civil war, always smouldering inthe south, and it required but little to excite the populaceto acts of far greater violence than the shouts and insultswith which they assailed the royalists whenever theyventured abroad.

　　Owing to this change, the worthy shipowner became at thatmoment -- we will not say all powerful, because Morrel was aprudent and rather a timid man, so much so, that many of themost zealous partisans of Bonaparte accused him of"moderation" -- but sufficiently influential to make ademand in favor of Dantes.

　　Villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put offuntil a more favorable opportunity. If the emperor remainedon the throne, Gerard required a different alliance to aidhis career; if Louis XVIII. returned, the influence of M. deSaint-Meran, like his own, could be vastly increased, andthe marriage be still more suitable. The deputy-procureurwas, therefore, the first magistrate of Marseilles, when onemorning his door opened, and M. Morrel was announced.

　　Any one else would have hastened to receive him; butVillefort was a man of ability, and he knew this would be asign of weakness. He made Morrel wait in the ante-chamber,although he had no one with him, for the simple reason thatthe king's procureur always makes every one wait, and afterpassing a quarter of an hour in reading the papers, heordered M. Morrel to be admitted.

　　Morrel expected Villefort would be dejected; he found him ashe had found him six weeks before, calm, firm, and full ofthat glacial politeness, that most insurmountable barrierwhich separates the well-bred from the vulgar man.

　　He had entered Villefort's office expecting that themagistrate would tremble at the sight of him; on thecontrary, he felt a cold shudder all over him when he sawVillefort sitting there with his elbow on his desk, and hishead leaning on his hand. He stopped at the door; Villefortgazed at him as if he had some difficulty in recognizinghim; then, after a brief interval, during which the honestshipowner turned his hat in his hands, --

　　"M. Morrel, I believe?" said Villefort.

　　"Yes, sir."

　　"Come nearer," said the magistrate, with a patronizing waveof the hand, "and tell me to what circumstance I owe thehonor of this visit."

　　"Do you not guess, monsieur?" asked Morrel.

　　"Not in the least; but if I can serve you in any way I shallbe delighted."

　　"Everything depends on you."

　　"Explain yourself, pray."

　　"Monsieur," said Morrel, recovering his assurance as heproceeded, "do you recollect that a few days before thelanding of his majesty the emperor, I came to intercede fora young man, the mate of my ship, who was accused of beingconcerned in correspondence with the Island of Elba? Whatwas the other day a crime is to-day a title to favor. Youthen served Louis XVIII., and you did not show any favor --it was your duty; to-day you serve Napoleon, and you oughtto protect him -- it is equally your duty; I come,therefore, to ask what has become of him?"

　　Villefort by a strong effort sought to control himself."What is his name?" said he. "Tell me his name."

　　"Edmond Dantes."

　　Villefort would probably have rather stood opposite themuzzle of a pistol at five-and-twenty paces than have heardthis name spoken; but he did not blanch.

　　"Dantes," repeated he, "Edmond Dantes."

　　"Yes, monsieur." Villefort opened a large register, thenwent to a table, from the table turned to his registers, andthen, turning to Morrel, --

　　"Are you quite sure you are not mistaken, monsieur?" saidhe, in the most natural tone in the world.

　　Had Morrel been a more quick-sighted man, or better versedin these matters, he would have been surprised at the king'sprocureur answering him on such a subject, instead ofreferring him to the governors of the prison or the prefectof the department. But Morrel, disappointed in hisexpectations of exciting fear, was conscious only of theother's condescension. Villefort had calculated rightly.

　　"No," said Morrel; "I am not mistaken. I have known him forten years, the last four of which he was in my service. Donot you recollect, I came about six weeks ago to plead forclemency, as I come to-day to plead for justice. Youreceived me very coldly. Oh, the royalists were very severewith the Bonapartists in those days."

　　"Monsieur," returned Villefort, "I was then a royalist,because I believed the Bourbons not only the heirs to thethrone, but the chosen of the nation. The miraculous returnof Napoleon has conquered me, the legitimate monarch is hewho is loved by his people."

　　"That's right!" cried Morrel. "I like to hear you speakthus, and I augur well for Edmond from it."

　　"Wait a moment," said Villefort, turning over the leaves ofa register; "I have it -- a sailor, who was about to marry ayoung Catalan girl. I recollect now; it was a very seriouscharge."

　　"How so?"

　　"You know that when he left here he was taken to the Palaisde Justice."

　　"Well?"

　　"I made my report to the authorities at Paris, and a weekafter he was carried off."

　　"Carried off!" said Morrel. "What can they have done withhim?"

　　"Oh, he has been taken to Fenestrelles, to Pignerol, or tothe Sainte-Marguerite islands. Some fine morning he willreturn to take command of your vessel."

　　"Come when he will, it shall be kept for him. But how is ithe is not already returned? It seems to me the first care ofgovernment should be to set at liberty those who havesuffered for their adherence to it."

　　"Do not be too hasty, M. Morrel," replied Villefort. "Theorder of imprisonment came from high authority, and theorder for his liberation must proceed from the same source;and, as Napoleon has scarcely been reinstated a fortnight,the letters have not yet been forwarded."

　　"But," said Morrel, "is there no way of expediting all theseformalities -- of releasing him from arrest?"

　　"There has been no arrest."

　　"How?"

　　"It is sometimes essential to government to cause a man'sdisappearance without leaving any traces, so that no writtenforms or documents may defeat their wishes."

　　"It might be so under the Bourbons, but at present" --

　　"It has always been so, my dear Morrel, since the reign ofLouis XIV. The emperor is more strict in prison disciplinethan even Louis himself, and the number of prisoners whosenames are not on the register is incalculable." Had Morreleven any suspicions, so much kindness would have dispelledthem.

　　"Well, M. de Villefort, how would you advise me to act?"asked he.

　　"Petition the minister."

　　"Oh, I know what that is; the minister receives two hundredpetitions every day, and does not read three."

　　"That is true; but he will read a petition countersigned andpresented by me."

　　"And will you undertake to deliver it?"

　　"With the greatest pleasure. Dantes was then guilty, and nowhe is innocent, and it is as much my duty to free him as itwas to condemn him." Villefort thus forestalled any dangerof an inquiry, which, however improbable it might be, if itdid take place would leave him defenceless.

　　"But how shall I address the minister?"

　　"Sit down there," said Villefort, giving up his place toMorrel, "and write what I dictate."

　　"Will you be so good?"

　　"Certainly. But lose no time; we have lost too muchalready."

　　"That is true. Only think what the poor fellow may even nowbe suffering." Villefort shuddered at the suggestion; but hehad gone too far to draw back. Dantes must be crushed togratify Villefort's ambition.

　　Villefort dictated a petition, in which, from an excellentintention, no doubt, Dantes' patriotic services wereexaggerated, and he was made out one of the most activeagents of Napoleon's return. It was evident that at thesight of this document the minister would instantly releasehim. The petition finished, Villefort read it aloud.

　　"That will do," said he; "leave the rest to me."

　　"Will the petition go soon?"

　　"To-day."

　　"Countersigned by you?"

　　"The best thing I can do will be to certify the truth of thecontents of your petition." And, sitting down, Villefortwrote the certificate at the bottom.

　　"What more is to be done?"

　　"I will do whatever is necessary." This assurance delightedMorrel, who took leave of Villefort, and hastened toannounce to old Dantes that he would soon see his son.

　　As for Villefort, instead of sending to Paris, he carefullypreserved the petition that so fearfully compromised Dantes,in the hopes of an event that seemed not unlikely, -- thatis, a second restoration. Dantes remained a prisoner, andheard not the noise of the fall of Louis XVIII.'s throne, orthe still more tragic destruction of the empire.

　　Twice during the Hundred Days had Morrel renewed his demand,and twice had Villefort soothed him with promises. At lastthere was Waterloo, and Morrel came no more; he had done allthat was in his power, and any fresh attempt would onlycompromise himself uselessly.

　　Louis XVIII. remounted the throne; Villefort, to whomMarseilles had become filled with remorseful memories,sought and obtained the situation of king's procureur atToulouse, and a fortnight afterwards he married Mademoisellede Saint-Meran, whose father now stood higher at court thanever.

　　And so Dantes, after the Hundred Days and after Waterloo,remained in his dungeon, forgotten of earth and heaven.Danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fatethat overwhelmed Dantes; and, when Napoleon returned toFrance, he, after the manner of mediocre minds, termed thecoincidence, "a decree of Providence." But when Napoleonreturned to Paris, Danglars' heart failed him, and he livedin constant fear of Dantes' return on a mission ofvengeance. He therefore informed M. Morrel of his wish toquit the sea, and obtained a recommendation from him to aSpanish merchant, into whose service he entered at the endof March, that is, ten or twelve days after Napoleon'sreturn. He then left for Madrid, and was no more heard of.

　　Fernand understood nothing except that Dantes was absent.What had become of him he cared not to inquire. Only, duringthe respite the absence of his rival afforded him, hereflected, partly on the means of deceiving Mercedes as tothe cause of his absence, partly on plans of emigration andabduction, as from time to time he sat sad and motionless onthe summit of Cape Pharo, at the spot from whence Marseillesand the Catalans are visible, watching for the apparition ofa young and handsome man, who was for him also the messengerof vengeance. Fernand's mind was made up; he would shootDantes, and then kill himself. But Fernand was mistaken; aman of his disposition never kills himself, for heconstantly hopes.

　　During this time the empire made its last conscription, andevery man in France capable of bearing arms rushed to obeythe summons of the emperor. Fernand departed with the rest,bearing with him the terrible thought that while he wasaway, his rival would perhaps return and marry Mercedes. HadFernand really meant to kill himself, he would have done sowhen he parted from Mercedes. His devotion, and thecompassion he showed for her misfortunes, produced theeffect they always produce on noble minds -- Mercedes hadalways had a sincere regard for Fernand, and this was nowstrengthened by gratitude.

　　"My brother," said she as she placed his knapsack on hisshoulders, "be careful of yourself, for if you are killed, Ishall be alone in the world." These words carried a ray ofhope into Fernand's heart. Should Dantes not return,Mercedes might one day be his.

　　Mercedes was left alone face to face with the vast plainthat had never seemed so barren, and the sea that had neverseemed so vast. Bathed in tears she wandered about theCatalan village. Sometimes she stood mute and motionless asa statue, looking towards Marseilles, at other times gazingon the sea, and debating as to whether it were not better tocast herself into the abyss of the ocean, and thus end herwoes. It was not want of courage that prevented her puttingthis resolution into execution; but her religious feelingscame to her aid and saved her. Caderousse was, like Fernand,enrolled in the army, but, being married and eight yearsolder, he was merely sent to the frontier. Old Dantes, whowas only sustained by hope, lost all hope at Napoleon'sdownfall. Five months after he had been separated from hisson, and almost at the hour of his arrest, he breathed hislast in Mercedes' arms. M. Morrel paid the expenses of hisfuneral, and a few small debts the poor old man hadcontracted.

　　There was more than benevolence in this action; there wascourage; the south was aflame, and to assist, even on hisdeath-bed, the father of so dangerous a Bonapartist asDantes, was stigmatized as a crime.

　　Chapter 14The Two Prisoners.

　　A year after Louis XVIII.'s restoration, a visit was made bythe inspector-general of prisons. Dantes in his cell heardthe noise of preparation, -- sounds that at the depth wherehe lay would have been inaudible to any but the ear of aprisoner, who could hear the plash of the drop of water thatevery hour fell from the roof of his dungeon. He guessedsomething uncommon was passing among the living; but he hadso long ceased to have any intercourse with the world, thathe looked upon himself as dead.

　　The inspector visited, one after another, the cells anddungeons of several of the prisoners, whose good behavior orstupidity recommended them to the clemency of thegovernment. He inquired how they were fed, and if they hadany request to make. The universal response was, that thefare was detestable, and that they wanted to be set free.

　　The inspector asked if they had anything else to ask for.They shook their heads. What could they desire beyond theirliberty? The inspector turned smilingly to the governor.

　　"I do not know what reason government can assign for theseuseless visits; when you see one prisoner, you see all, --always the same thing, -- ill fed and innocent. Are thereany others?"

　　"Yes; the dangerous and mad prisoners are in the dungeons."

　　"Let us visit them," said the inspector with an air offatigue. "We must play the farce to the end. Let us see thedungeons."

　　"Let us first send for two soldiers," said the governor."The prisoners sometimes, through mere uneasiness of life,and in order to be sentenced to death, commit acts ofuseless violence, and you might fall a victim."

　　"Take all needful precautions," replied the inspector.

　　Two soldiers were accordingly sent for, and the inspectordescended a stairway, so foul, so humid, so dark, as to beloathsome to sight, smell, and respiration.

　　"Oh," cried the inspector, "who can live here?"

　　"A most dangerous conspirator, a man we are ordered to keepthe most strict watch over, as he is daring and resolute."

　　"He is alone?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"How long his he been there?"

　　"Nearly a year."

　　"Was he placed here when he first arrived?"

　　"No; not until he attempted to kill the turnkey, who tookhis food to him."

　　"To kill the turnkey?"

　　"Yes, the very one who is lighting us. Is it not true,Antoine?" asked the governor.

　　"True enough; he wanted to kill me!" returned the turnkey.

　　"He must be mad," said the inspector.

　　"He is worse than that, -- he is a devil!" returned theturnkey.

　　"Shall I complain of him?" demanded the inspector.

　　"Oh, no; it is useless. Besides, he is almost mad now, andin another year he will be quite so."

　　"So much the better for him, -- he will suffer less," saidthe inspector. He was, as this remark shows, a man full ofphilanthropy, and in every way fit for his office.

　　"You are right, sir," replied the governor; "and this remarkproves that you have deeply considered the subject. Now wehave in a dungeon about twenty feet distant, and to whichyou descend by another stair, an abbe, formerly leader of aparty in Italy, who has been here since 1811, and in 1813 hewent mad, and the change is astonishing. He used to weep, henow laughs; he grew thin, he now grows fat. You had bettersee him, for his madness is amusing."

　　"I will see them both," returned the inspector; "I mustconscientiously perform my duty." This was the inspector'sfirst visit; he wished to display his authority.

　　"Let us visit this one first," added he.

　　"By all means," replied the governor, and he signed to theturnkey to open the door. At the sound of the key turning inthe lock, and the creaking of the hinges, Dantes, who wascrouched in a corner of the dungeon, whence he could see theray of light that came through a narrow iron grating above,raised his head. Seeing a stranger, escorted by two turnkeysholding torches and accompanied by two soldiers, and to whomthe governor spoke bareheaded, Dantes, who guessed thetruth, and that the moment to address himself to thesuperior authorities was come, sprang forward with claspedhands.

　　The soldiers interposed their bayonets, for they thoughtthat he was about to attack the inspector, and the latterrecoiled two or three steps. Dantes saw that he was lookedupon as dangerous. Then, infusing all the humility hepossessed into his eyes and voice, he addressed theinspector, and sought to inspire him with pity.

　　The inspector listened attentively; then, turning to thegovernor, observed, "He will become religious -- he isalready more gentle; he is afraid, and retreated before thebayonets -- madmen are not afraid of anything; I made somecurious observations on this at Charenton." Then, turning tothe prisoner, "What is it you want?" said he.

　　"I want to know what crime I have committed -- to be tried;and if I am guilty, to be shot; if innocent, to be set atliberty."

　　"Are you well fed?" said the inspector.

　　"I believe so; I don't know; it's of no consequence. Whatmatters really, not only to me, but to officers of justiceand the king, is that an innocent man should languish inprison, the victim of an infamous denunciation, to die herecursing his executioners."

　　"You are very humble to-day," remarked the governor; "youare not so always; the other day, for instance, when youtried to kill the turnkey."

　　"It is true, sir, and I beg his pardon, for he his alwaysbeen very good to me, but I was mad."

　　"And you are not so any longer?"

　　"No; captivity his subdued me -- I have been here so long."

　　"So long? -- when were you arrested, then?" asked theinspector.

　　"The 28th of February, 1815, at half-past two in theafternoon."

　　"To-day is the 30th of July, 1816, -- why it is butseventeen months."

　　"Only seventeen months," replied Dantes. "Oh, you do notknow what is seventeen months in prison! -- seventeen agesrather, especially to a man who, like me, had arrived at thesummit of his ambition -- to a man, who, like me, was on thepoint of marrying a woman he adored, who saw an honorablecareer opened before him, and who loses all in an instant --who sees his prospects destroyed, and is ignorant of thefate of his affianced wife, and whether his aged father bestill living! Seventeen months captivity to a sailoraccustomed to the boundless ocean, is a worse punishmentthan human crime ever merited. Have pity on me, then, andask for me, not intelligence, but a trial; not pardon, but averdict -- a trial, sir, I ask only for a trial; that,surely, cannot be denied to one who is accused!"

　　"We shall see," said the inspector; then, turning to thegovernor, "On my word, the poor devil touches me. You mustshow me the proofs against him."

　　"Certainly; but you will find terrible charges."

　　"Monsieur," continued Dantes, "I know it is not in yourpower to release me; but you can plead for me -- you canhave me tried -- and that is all I ask. Let me know mycrime, and the reason why I was condemned. Uncertainty isworse than all."

　　"Go on with the lights," said the inspector.

　　"Monsieur," cried Dantes, "I can tell by your voice you aretouched with pity; tell me at least to hope."

　　"I cannot tell you that," replied the inspector; "I can onlypromise to examine into your case."

　　"Oh, I am free -- then I am saved!"

　　"Who arrested you?"

　　"M. Villefort. See him, and hear what he says."

　　"M. Villefort is no longer at Marseilles; he is now atToulouse."

　　"I am no longer surprised at my detention," murmured Dantes,"since my only protector is removed."

　　"Had M. de Villefort any cause of personal dislike to you?"

　　"None; on the contrary, he was very kind to me."

　　"I can, then, rely on the notes he has left concerning you?"

　　"Entirely."

　　"That is well; wait patiently, then." Dantes fell on hisknees, and prayed earnestly. The door closed; but this timea fresh inmate was left with Dantes -- hope.

　　"Will you see the register at once," asked the governor, "orproceed to the other cell?"

　　"Let us visit them all," said the inspector. "If I once wentup those stairs. I should never have the courage to comedown again."

　　"Ah, this one is not like the other, and his madness is lessaffecting than this one's display of reason."

　　"What is his folly?"

　　"He fancies he possesses an immense treasure. The first yearhe offered government a million of francs for his release;the second, two; the third, three; and so on progressively.He is now in his fifth year of captivity; he will ask tospeak to you in private, and offer you five millions."

　　"How curious! -- what is his name?"

　　"The Abbe Faria."

　　"No. 27," said the inspector.

　　"It is here; unlock the door, Antoine." The turnkey obeyed,and the inspector gazed curiously into the chamber of the"mad abbe."

　　In the centre of the cell, in a circle traced with afragment of plaster detached from the wall, sat a man whosetattered garments scarcely covered him. He was drawing inthis circle geometrical lines, and seemed as much absorbedin his problem as Archimedes was when the soldier ofMarcellus slew him.

　　He did not move at the sound of the door, and continued hiscalculations until the flash of the torches lighted up withan unwonted glare the sombre walls of his cell; then,raising his head, he perceived with astonishment the numberof persons present. He hastily seized the coverlet of hisbed, and wrapped it round him.

　　"What is it you want?" said the inspector.

　　"I, monsieur," replied the abbe with an air of surprise --"I want nothing."

　　"You do not understand," continued the inspector; "I am senthere by government to visit the prison, and hear therequests of the prisoners."

　　"Oh, that is different," cried the abbe; "and we shallunderstand each other, I hope."

　　"There, now," whispered the governor, "it is just as I toldyou."

　　"Monsieur," continued the prisoner, "I am the Abbe Faria,born at Rome. I was for twenty years Cardinal Spada'ssecretary; I was arrested, why, I know not, toward thebeginning of the year 1811; since then I have demanded myliberty from the Italian and French government."

　　"Why from the French government?"

　　"Because I was arrested at Piombino, and I presume that,like Milan and Florence, Piombino has become the capital ofsome French department."

　　"Ah," said the inspector, "you have not the latest news fromItaly?"

　　"My information dates from the day on which I was arrested,"returned the Abbe Faria; "and as the emperor had created thekingdom of Rome for his infant son, I presume that he hasrealized the dream of Machiavelli and Caesar Borgia, whichwas to make Italy a united kingdom."

　　"Monsieur," returned the inspector, "providence has changedthis gigantic plan you advocate so warmly."

　　"It is the only means of rendering Italy strong, happy, andindependent."

　　"Very possibly; only I am not come to discuss politics, butto inquire if you have anything to ask or to complain of."

　　"The food is the same as in other prisons, -- that is, verybad; the lodging is very unhealthful, but, on the whole,passable for a dungeon; but it is not that which I wish tospeak of, but a secret I have to reveal of the greatestimportance."

　　"We are coming to the point," whispered the governor.

　　"It is for that reason I am delighted to see you," continuedthe abbe, "although you have disturbed me in a mostimportant calculation, which, if it succeeded, wouldpossibly change Newton's system. Could you allow me a fewwords in private."

　　"What did I tell you?" said the governor.

　　"You knew him," returned the inspector with a smile.

　　"What you ask is impossible, monsieur," continued he,addressing Faria.

　　"But," said the abbe, "I would speak to you of a large sum,amounting to five millions."

　　"The very sum you named," whispered the inspector in histurn.

　　"However," continued Faria, seeing that the inspector wasabout to depart, "it is not absolutely necessary for us tobe alone; the governor can be present."

　　"Unfortunately," said the governor, "I know beforehand whatyou are about to say; it concerns your treasures, does itnot?" Faria fixed his eyes on him with an expression thatwould have convinced any one else of his sanity.

　　"Of course," said he; "of what else should I speak?"

　　"Mr. Inspector," continued the governor, "I can tell you thestory as well as he, for it has been dinned in my ears forthe last four or five years."

　　"That proves," returned the abbe, "that you are like thoseof Holy Writ, who having ears hear not, and having eyes seenot."

　　"My dear sir, the government is rich and does not want yourtreasures," replied the inspector; "keep them until you areliberated." The abbe's eyes glistened; he seized theinspector's hand.

　　"But what if I am not liberated," cried he, "and am detainedhere until my death? this treasure will be lost. Had notgovernment better profit by it? I will offer six millions,and I will content myself with the rest, if they will onlygive me my liberty."

　　"On my word," said the inspector in a low tone, "had I notbeen told beforehand that this man was mad, I should believewhat he says."

　　"I am not mad," replied Faria, with that acuteness ofhearing peculiar to prisoners. "The treasure I speak ofreally exists, and I offer to sign an agreement with you, inwhich I promise to lead you to the spot where you shall dig;and if I deceive you, bring me here again, -- I ask nomore."

　　The governor laughed. "Is the spot far from here?"

　　"A hundred leagues."

　　"It is not ill-planned," said the governor. "If all theprisoners took it into their heads to travel a hundredleagues, and their guardians consented to accompany them,they would have a capital chance of escaping."

　　"The scheme is well known," said the inspector; "and theabbe's plan has not even the merit of originality."

　　Then turning to Faria -- "I inquired if you are well fed?"said he.

　　"Swear to me," replied Faria, "to free me if what I tell youprove true, and I will stay here while you go to the spot."

　　"Are you well fed?" repeated the inspector.

　　"Monsieur, you run no risk, for, as I told you, I will stayhere; so there is no chance of my escaping."

　　"You do not reply to my question," replied the inspectorimpatiently.

　　"Nor you to mine," cried the abbe. "You will not accept mygold; I will keep it for myself. You refuse me my liberty;God will give it me." And the abbe, casting away hiscoverlet, resumed his place, and continued his calculations.

　　"What is he doing there?" said the inspector.

　　"Counting his treasures," replied the governor.

　　Faria replied to this sarcasm with a glance of profoundcontempt. They went out. The turnkey closed the door behindthem.

　　"He was wealthy once, perhaps?" said the inspector.

　　"Or dreamed he was, and awoke mad."

　　"After all," said the inspector, "if he had been rich, hewould not have been here." So the matter ended for the AbbeFaria. He remained in his cell, and this visit onlyincreased the belief in his insanity.

　　Caligula or Nero, those treasure-seekers, those desirers ofthe impossible, would have accorded to the poor wretch, inexchange for his wealth, the liberty he so earnestly prayedfor. But the kings of modern times, restrained by the limitsof mere probability, have neither courage nor desire. Theyfear the ear that hears their orders, and the eye thatscrutinizes their actions. Formerly they believed themselvessprung from Jupiter, and shielded by their birth; butnowadays they are not inviolable.

　　It has always been against the policy of despoticgovernments to suffer the victims of their persecutions toreappear. As the Inquisition rarely allowed its victims tobe seen with their limbs distorted and their flesh laceratedby torture, so madness is always concealed in its cell, fromwhence, should it depart, it is conveyed to some gloomyhospital, where the doctor has no thought for man or mind inthe mutilated being the jailer delivers to him. The verymadness of the Abbe Faria, gone mad in prison, condemned himto perpetual captivity.

　　The inspector kept his word with Dantes; he examined theregister, and found the following note concerning him: --

　　Edmond Dantes:

　　Violent Bonapartist; took an active part in the return fromElba.

　　The greatest watchfulness and care to be exercised.

　　This note was in a different hand from the rest, whichshowed that it had been added since his confinement. Theinspector could not contend against this accusation; hesimply wrote, -- "Nothing to be done."

　　This visit had infused new vigor into Dantes; he had, tillthen, forgotten the date; but now, with a fragment ofplaster, he wrote the date, 30th July, 1816, and made a markevery day, in order not to lose his reckoning again. Daysand weeks passed away, then months -- Dantes still waited;he at first expected to be freed in a fortnight. Thisfortnight expired, he decided that the inspector would donothing until his return to Paris, and that he would notreach there until his circuit was finished, he thereforefixed three months; three months passed away, then six more.Finally ten months and a half had gone by and no favorablechange had taken place, and Dantes began to fancy theinspector's visit but a dream, an illusion of the brain.

　　At the expiration of a year the governor was transferred; hehad obtained charge of the fortress at Ham. He took with himseveral of his subordinates, and amongst them Dantes'jailer. A new governor arrived; it would have been tootedious to acquire the names of the prisoners; he learnedtheir numbers instead. This horrible place contained fiftycells; their inhabitants were designated by the numbers oftheir cell, and the unhappy young man was no longer calledEdmond Dantes -- he was now number 34.

　　Chapter 15Number 34 and Number 27.

　　Dantes passed through all the stages of torture natural toprisoners in suspense. He was sustained at first by thatpride of conscious innocence which is the sequence to hope;then he began to doubt his own innocence, which justified insome measure the governor's belief in his mental alienation;and then, relaxing his sentiment of pride, he addressed hissupplications, not to God, but to man. God is always thelast resource. Unfortunates, who ought to begin with God, donot have any hope in him till they have exhausted all othermeans of deliverance.

　　Dantes asked to be removed from his present dungeon intoanother; for a change, however disadvantageous, was still achange, and would afford him some amusement. He entreated tobe allowed to walk about, to have fresh air, books, andwriting materials. His requests were not granted, but hewent on asking all the same. He accustomed himself tospeaking to the new jailer, although the latter was, ifpossible, more taciturn than the old one; but still, tospeak to a man, even though mute, was something. Dantesspoke for the sake of hearing his own voice; he had tried tospeak when alone, but the sound of his voice terrified him.Often, before his captivity, Dantes, mind had revolted atthe idea of assemblages of prisoners, made up of thieves,vagabonds, and murderers. He now wished to be amongst them,in order to see some other face besides that of his jailer;he sighed for the galleys, with the infamous costume, thechain, and the brand on the shoulder. The galley-slavesbreathed the fresh air of heaven, and saw each other. Theywere very happy. He besought the jailer one day to let himhave a companion, were it even the mad abbe.

　　The jailer, though rough and hardened by the constant sightof so much suffering, was yet a man. At the bottom of hisheart he had often had a feeling of pity for this unhappyyoung man who suffered so; and he laid the request of number34 before the governor; but the latter sapiently imaginedthat Dantes wished to conspire or attempt an escape, andrefused his request. Dantes had exhausted all humanresources, and he then turned to God.

　　All the pious ideas that had been so long forgotten,returned; he recollected the prayers his mother had taughthim, and discovered a new meaning in every word; for inprosperity prayers seem but a mere medley of words, untilmisfortune comes and the unhappy sufferer first understandsthe meaning of the sublime language in which he invokes thepity of heaven! He prayed, and prayed aloud, no longerterrified at the sound of his own voice, for he fell into asort of ecstasy. He laid every action of his life before theAlmighty, proposed tasks to accomplish, and at the end ofevery prayer introduced the entreaty oftener addressed toman than to God: "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgivethem that trespass against us." Yet in spite of his earnestprayers, Dantes remained a prisoner.

　　Then gloom settled heavily upon him. Dantes was a man ofgreat simplicity of thought, and without education; he couldnot, therefore, in the solitude of his dungeon, traverse inmental vision the history of the ages, bring to life thenations that had perished, and rebuild the ancient cities sovast and stupendous in the light of the imagination, andthat pass before the eye glowing with celestial colors inMartin's Babylonian pictures. He could not do this, he whosepast life was so short, whose present so melancholy, and hisfuture so doubtful. Nineteen years of light to reflect uponin eternal darkness! No distraction could come to his aid;his energetic spirit, that would have exalted in thusrevisiting the past, was imprisoned like an eagle in a cage.He clung to one idea -- that of his happiness, destroyed,without apparent cause, by an unheard-of fatality; heconsidered and reconsidered this idea, devoured it (so tospeak), as the implacable Ugolino devours the skull ofArchbishop Roger in the Inferno of Dante.

　　Rage supplanted religious fervor. Dantes uttered blasphemiesthat made his jailer recoil with horror, dashed himselffuriously against the walls of his prison, wreaked his angerupon everything, and chiefly upon himself, so that the leastthing, -- a grain of sand, a straw, or a breath of air thatannoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury. Then the letter thatVillefort had showed to him recurred to his mind, and everyline gleamed forth in fiery letters on the wall like themene tekel upharsin of Belshazzar. He told himself that itwas the enmity of man, and not the vengeance of heaven, thathad thus plunged him into the deepest misery. He consignedhis unknown persecutors to the most horrible tortures hecould imagine, and found them all insufficient, becauseafter torture came death, and after death, if not repose, atleast the boon of unconsciousness.

　　By dint of constantly dwelling on the idea that tranquillitywas death, and if punishment were the end in view othertortures than death must be invented, he began to reflect onsuicide. Unhappy he, who, on the brink of misfortune, broodsover ideas like these!

　　Before him is a dead sea that stretches in azure calm beforethe eye; but he who unwarily ventures within its embracefinds himself struggling with a monster that would drag himdown to perdition. Once thus ensnared, unless the protectinghand of God snatch him thence, all is over, and hisstruggles but tend to hasten his destruction. This state ofmental anguish is, however, less terrible than thesufferings that precede or the punishment that possibly willfollow. There is a sort of consolation at the contemplationof the yawning abyss, at the bottom of which lie darknessand obscurity.

　　Edmond found some solace in these ideas. All his sorrows,all his sufferings, with their train of gloomy spectres,fled from his cell when the angel of death seemed about toenter. Dantes reviewed his past life with composure, and,looking forward with terror to his future existence, chosethat middle line that seemed to afford him a refuge.

　　"Sometimes," said he, "in my voyages, when I was a man andcommanded other men, I have seen the heavens overcast, thesea rage and foam, the storm arise, and, like a monstrousbird, beating the two horizons with its wings. Then I feltthat my vessel was a vain refuge, that trembled and shookbefore the tempest. Soon the fury of the waves and the sightof the sharp rocks announced the approach of death, anddeath then terrified me, and I used all my skill andintelligence as a man and a sailor to struggle against thewrath of God. But I did so because I was happy, because Ihad not courted death, because to be cast upon a bed ofrocks and seaweed seemed terrible, because I was unwillingthat I, a creature made for the service of God, should servefor food to the gulls and ravens. But now it is different; Ihave lost all that bound me to life, death smiles andinvites me to repose; I die after my own manner, I dieexhausted and broken-spirited, as I fall asleep when I havepaced three thousand times round my cell."

　　No sooner had this idea taken possession of him than hebecame more composed, arranged his couch to the best of hispower, ate little and slept less, and found existence almostsupportable, because he felt that he could throw it off atpleasure, like a worn-out garment. Two methods ofself-destruction were at his disposal. He could hang himselfwith his handkerchief to the window bars, or refuse food anddie of starvation. But the first was repugnant to him.Dantes had always entertained the greatest horror ofpirates, who are hung up to the yard-arm; he would not dieby what seemed an infamous death. He resolved to adopt thesecond, and began that day to carry out his resolve. Nearlyfour years had passed away; at the end of the second he hadceased to mark the lapse of time.

　　Dantes said, "I wish to die," and had chosen the manner ofhis death, and fearful of changing his mind, he had taken anoath to die. "When my morning and evening meals arebrought," thought he, "I will cast them out of the window,and they will think that I have eaten them."

　　He kept his word; twice a day he cast out, through thebarred aperture, the provisions his jailer brought him -- atfirst gayly, then with deliberation, and at last withregret. Nothing but the recollection of his oath gave himstrength to proceed. Hunger made viands once repugnant, nowacceptable; he held the plate in his hand for an hour at atime, and gazed thoughtfully at the morsel of bad meat, oftainted fish, of black and mouldy bread. It was the lastyearning for life contending with the resolution of despair;then his dungeon seemed less sombre, his prospects lessdesperate. He was still young -- he was only four or fiveand twenty -- he had nearly fifty years to live. Whatunforseen events might not open his prison door, and restorehim to liberty? Then he raised to his lips the repast that,like a voluntary Tantalus, he refused himself; but hethought of his oath, and he would not break it. He persisteduntil, at last, he had not sufficient strength to rise andcast his supper out of the loophole. The next morning hecould not see or hear; the jailer feared he was dangerouslyill. Edmond hoped he was dying.

　　Thus the day passed away. Edmond felt a sort of stuporcreeping over him which brought with it a feeling almost ofcontent; the gnawing pain at his stomach had ceased; histhirst had abated; when he closed his eyes he saw myriads oflights dancing before them like the will-o'-the-wisps thatplay about the marshes. It was the twilight of thatmysterious country called Death!

　　Suddenly, about nine o'clock in the evening, Edmond heard ahollow sound in the wall against which he was lying.

　　So many loathsome animals inhabited the prison, that theirnoise did not, in general, awake him; but whether abstinencehad quickened his faculties, or whether the noise was reallylouder than usual, Edmond raised his head and listened. Itwas a continual scratching, as if made by a huge claw, apowerful tooth, or some iron instrument attacking thestones.

　　Although weakened, the young man's brain instantly respondedto the idea that haunts all prisoners -- liberty! It seemedto him that heaven had at length taken pity on him, and hadsent this noise to warn him on the very brink of the abyss.Perhaps one of those beloved ones he had so often thought ofwas thinking of him, and striving to diminish the distancethat separated them.

　　No, no, doubtless he was deceived, and it was but one ofthose dreams that forerun death!

　　Edmond still heard the sound. It lasted nearly three hours;he then heard a noise of something falling, and all wassilent.

　　Some hours afterwards it began again, nearer and moredistinct. Edmond was intensely interested. Suddenly thejailer entered.

　　For a week since he had resolved to die, and during the fourdays that he had been carrying out his purpose, Edmond hadnot spoken to the attendant, had not answered him when heinquired what was the matter with him, and turned his faceto the wall when he looked too curiously at him; but now thejailer might hear the noise and put an end to it, and sodestroy a ray of something like hope that soothed his lastmoments.

　　The jailer brought him his breakfast. Dantes raised himselfup and began to talk about everything; about the bad qualityof the food, about the coldness of his dungeon, grumblingand complaining, in order to have an excuse for speakinglouder, and wearying the patience of his jailer, who out ofkindness of heart had brought broth and white bread for hisprisoner.

　　Fortunately, he fancied that Dantes was delirious; andplacing the food on the rickety table, he withdrew. Edmondlistened, and the sound became more and more distinct.

　　"There can be no doubt about it," thought he; "it is someprisoner who is striving to obtain his freedom. Oh, if Iwere only there to help him!" Suddenly another idea tookpossession of his mind, so used to misfortune, that it wasscarcely capable of hope -- the idea that the noise was madeby workmen the governor had ordered to repair theneighboring dungeon.

　　It was easy to ascertain this; but how could he risk thequestion? It was easy to call his jailer's attention to thenoise, and watch his countenance as he listened; but mighthe not by this means destroy hopes far more important thanthe short-lived satisfaction of his own curiosity?Unfortunately, Edmond's brain was still so feeble that hecould not bend his thoughts to anything in particular.

　　He saw but one means of restoring lucidity and clearness tohis judgment. He turned his eyes towards the soup which thejailer had brought, rose, staggered towards it, raised thevessel to his lips, and drank off the contents with afeeling of indescribable pleasure. He had often heard thatshipwrecked persons had died through having eagerly devouredtoo much food. Edmond replaced on the table the bread he wasabout to devour, and returned to his couch -- he did notwish to die. He soon felt that his ideas became againcollected -- he could think, and strengthen his thoughts byreasoning. Then he said to himself, "I must put this to thetest, but without compromising anybody. If it is a workman,I need but knock against the wall, and he will cease towork, in order to find out who is knocking, and why he doesso; but as his occupation is sanctioned by the governor, hewill soon resume it. If, on the contrary, it is a prisoner,the noise I make will alarm him, he will cease, and notbegin again until he thinks every one is asleep."

　　Edmond rose again, but this time his legs did not tremble,and his sight was clear; he went to a corner of his dungeon,detached a stone, and with it knocked against the wall wherethe sound came. He struck thrice. At the first blow thesound ceased, as if by magic.

　　Edmond listened intently; an hour passed, two hours passed,and no sound was heard from the wall -- all was silentthere.

　　Full of hope, Edmond swallowed a few mouthfuls of bread andwater, and, thanks to the vigor of his constitution, foundhimself well-nigh recovered.

　　The day passed away in utter silence -- night came withoutrecurrence of the noise.

　　"It is a prisoner," said Edmond joyfully. The night passedin perfect silence. Edmond did not close his eyes.

　　In the morning the jailer brought him fresh provisions -- hehad already devoured those of the previous day; he ate theselistening anxiously for the sound, walking round and roundhis cell, shaking the iron bars of the loophole, restoringvigor and agility to his limbs by exercise, and so preparinghimself for his future destiny. At intervals he listened tolearn if the noise had not begun again, and grew impatientat the prudence of the prisoner, who did not guess he hadbeen disturbed by a captive as anxious for liberty ashimself.

　　Three days passed -- seventy-two long tedious hours which hecounted off by minutes!

　　At length one evening, as the jailer was visiting him forthe last time that night, Dantes, with his ear for thehundredth time at the wall, fancied he heard an almostimperceptible movement among the stones. He moved away,walked up and down his cell to collect his thoughts, andthen went back and listened.

　　The matter was no longer doubtful. Something was at work onthe other side of the wall; the prisoner had discovered thedanger, and had substituted a lever for a chisel.

　　Encouraged by this discovery, Edmond determined to assistthe indefatigable laborer. He began by moving his bed, andlooked around for anything with which he could pierce thewall, penetrate the moist cement, and displace a stone.

　　He saw nothing, he had no knife or sharp instrument, thewindow grating was of iron, but he had too often assuredhimself of its solidity. All his furniture consisted of abed, a chair, a table, a pail, and a jug. The bed had ironclamps, but they were screwed to the wood, and it would haverequired a screw-driver to take them off. The table andchair had nothing, the pail had once possessed a handle, butthat had been removed.

　　Dantes had but one resource, which was to break the jug, andwith one of the sharp fragments attack the wall. He let thejug fall on the floor, and it broke in pieces.

　　Dantes concealed two or three of the sharpest fragments inhis bed, leaving the rest on the floor. The breaking of hisjug was too natural an accident to excite suspicion. Edmondhad all the night to work in, but in the darkness he couldnot do much, and he soon felt that he was working againstsomething very hard; he pushed back his bed, and waited forday.

　　All night he heard the subterranean workman, who continuedto mine his way. Day came, the jailer entered. Dantes toldhim that the jug had fallen from his hands while he wasdrinking, and the jailer went grumblingly to fetch another,without giving himself the trouble to remove the fragmentsof the broken one. He returned speedily, advised theprisoner to be more careful, and departed.

　　Dantes heard joyfully the key grate in the lock; he listeneduntil the sound of steps died away, and then, hastilydisplacing his bed, saw by the faint light that penetratedinto his cell, that he had labored uselessly the previousevening in attacking the stone instead of removing theplaster that surrounded it.

　　The damp had rendered it friable, and Dantes was able tobreak it off -- in small morsels, it is true, but at the endof half an hour he had scraped off a handful; amathematician might have calculated that in two years,supposing that the rock was not encountered, a passagetwenty feet long and two feet broad, might be formed.

　　The prisoner reproached himself with not having thusemployed the hours he had passed in vain hopes, prayer, anddespondency. During the six years that he had beenimprisoned, what might he not have accomplished?

　　In three days he had succeeded, with the utmost precaution,in removing the cement, and exposing the stone-work. Thewall was built of rough stones, among which, to givestrength to the structure, blocks of hewn stone were atintervals imbedded. It was one of these he had uncovered,and which he must remove from its socket.

　　Dantes strove to do this with his nails, but they were tooweak. The fragments of the jug broke, and after an hour ofuseless toil, he paused.

　　Was he to be thus stopped at the beginning, and was he towait inactive until his fellow workman had completed histask? Suddenly an idea occurred to him -- he smiled, and theperspiration dried on his forehead.

　　The jailer always brought Dantes' soup in an iron saucepan;this saucepan contained soup for both prisoners, for Danteshad noticed that it was either quite full, or half empty,according as the turnkey gave it to him or to his companionfirst.

　　The handle of this saucepan was of iron; Dantes would havegiven ten years of his life in exchange for it.

　　The jailer was accustomed to pour the contents of thesaucepan into Dantes' plate, and Dantes, after eating hissoup with a wooden spoon, washed the plate, which thusserved for every day. Now when evening came Dantes put hisplate on the ground near the door; the jailer, as heentered, stepped on it and broke it.

　　This time he could not blame Dantes. He was wrong to leaveit there, but the jailer was wrong not to have looked beforehim.

　　The jailer, therefore, only grumbled. Then he looked aboutfor something to pour the soup into; Dantes' entire dinnerservice consisted of one plate -- there was no alternative.

　　"Leave the saucepan," said Dantes; "you can take it awaywhen you bring me my breakfast." This advice was to thejailer's taste, as it spared him the necessity of makinganother trip. He left the saucepan.

　　Dantes was beside himself with joy. He rapidly devoured hisfood, and after waiting an hour, lest the jailer shouldchange his mind and return, he removed his bed, took thehandle of the saucepan, inserted the point between the hewnstone and rough stones of the wall, and employed it as alever. A slight oscillation showed Dantes that all wentwell. At the end of an hour the stone was extricated fromthe wall, leaving a cavity a foot and a half in diameter.

　　Dantes carefully collected the plaster, carried it into thecorner of his cell, and covered it with earth. Then, wishingto make the best use of his time while he had the means oflabor, he continued to work without ceasing. At the dawn ofday he replaced the stone, pushed his bed against the wall,and lay down. The breakfast consisted of a piece of bread;the jailer entered and placed the bread on the table.

　　"Well, don't you intend to bring me another plate?" saidDantes.

　　"No," replied the turnkey; "you destroy everything. Firstyou break your jug, then you make me break your plate; ifall the prisoners followed your example, the governmentwould be ruined. I shall leave you the saucepan, and pouryour soup into that. So for the future I hope you will notbe so destructive."

　　Dantes raised his eyes to heaven and clasped his handsbeneath the coverlet. He felt more gratitude for thepossession of this piece of iron than he had ever felt foranything. He had noticed, however, that the prisoner on theother side had ceased to labor; no matter, this was agreater reason for proceeding -- if his neighbor would notcome to him, he would go to his neighbor. All day he toiledon untiringly, and by the evening he had succeeded inextracting ten handfuls of plaster and fragments of stone.When the hour for his jailer's visit arrived, Dantesstraightened the handle of the saucepan as well as he could,and placed it in its accustomed place. The turnkey pouredhis ration of soup into it, together with the fish -- forthrice a week the prisoners were deprived of meat. Thiswould have been a method of reckoning time, had not Danteslong ceased to do so. Having poured out the soup, theturnkey retired. Dantes wished to ascertain whether hisneighbor had really ceased to work. He listened -- all wassilent, as it had been for the last three days. Dantessighed; it was evident that his neighbor distrusted him.However, he toiled on all the night without beingdiscouraged; but after two or three hours he encountered anobstacle. The iron made no impression, but met with a smoothsurface; Dantes touched it, and found that it was a beam.This beam crossed, or rather blocked up, the hole Dantes hadmade; it was necessary, therefore, to dig above or under it.The unhappy young man had not thought of this. "O my God, myGod!" murmured he, "I have so earnestly prayed to you, thatI hoped my prayers had been heard. After having deprived meof my liberty, after having deprived me of death, afterhaving recalled me to existence, my God, have pity on me,and do not let me die in despair!"

　　"Who talks of God and despair at the same time?" said avoice that seemed to come from beneath the earth, and,deadened by the distance, sounded hollow and sepulchral inthe young man's ears. Edmond's hair stood on end, and herose to his knees.

　　"Ah," said he, "I hear a human voice." Edmond had not heardany one speak save his jailer for four or five years; and ajailer is no man to a prisoner -- he is a living door, abarrier of flesh and blood adding strength to restraints ofoak and iron.

　　"In the name of heaven," cried Dantes, "speak again, thoughthe sound of your voice terrifies me. Who are you?"

　　"Who are you?" said the voice.

　　"An unhappy prisoner," replied Dantes, who made nohesitation in answering.

　　"Of what country?"

　　"A Frenchman."

　　"Your name?"

　　"Edmond Dantes."

　　"Your profession?"

　　"A sailor."

　　"How long have you been here?"

　　"Since the 28th of February, 1815."

　　"Your crime?"

　　"I am innocent."

　　"But of what are you accused?"

　　"Of having conspired to aid the emperor's return."

　　"What! For the emperor's return? -- the emperor is no longeron the throne, then?"

　　"He abdicated at Fontainebleau in 1814, and was sent to theIsland of Elba. But how long have you been here that you areignorant of all this?"

　　"Since 1811."

　　Dantes shuddered; this man had been four years longer thanhimself in prison.

　　"Do not dig any more," said the voice; "only tell me howhigh up is your excavation?"

　　"On a level with the floor."

　　"How is it concealed?"

　　"Behind my bed."

　　"Has your bed been moved since you have been a prisoner?"

　　"No."

　　"What does your chamber open on?"

　　"A corridor."

　　"And the corridor?"

　　"On a court."

　　"Alas!" murmured the voice.

　　"Oh, what is the matter?" cried Dantes.

　　"I have made a mistake owing to an error in my plans. I tookthe wrong angle, and have come out fifteen feet from where Iintended. I took the wall you are mining for the outer wallof the fortress."

　　"But then you would be close to the sea?"

　　"That is what I hoped."

　　"And supposing you had succeeded?"

　　"I should have thrown myself into the sea, gained one of theislands near here -- the Isle de Daume or the Isle deTiboulen -- and then I should have been safe."

　　"Could you have swum so far?"

　　"Heaven would have given me strength; but now all is lost."

　　"All?"

　　"Yes; stop up your excavation carefully, do not work anymore, and wait until you hear from me."

　　"Tell me, at least, who you are?"

　　"I am -- I am No. 27."

　　"You mistrust me, then," said Dantes. Edmond fancied heheard a bitter laugh resounding from the depths.

　　"Oh, I am a Christian," cried Dantes, guessing instinctivelythat this man meant to abandon him. "I swear to you by himwho died for us that naught shall induce me to breathe onesyllable to my jailers; but I conjure you do not abandon me.If you do, I swear to you, for I have got to the end of mystrength, that I will dash my brains out against the wall,and you will have my death to reproach yourself with."

　　"How old are you? Your voice is that of a young man."

　　"I do not know my age, for I have not counted the years Ihave been here. All I do know is, that I was just nineteenwhen I was arrested, the 28th of February, 1815."

　　"Not quite twenty-six!" murmured the voice; "at that age hecannot be a traitor."

　　"Oh, no, no," cried Dantes. "I swear to you again, ratherthan betray you, I would allow myself to be hacked inpieces!"

　　"You have done well to speak to me, and ask for myassistance, for I was about to form another plan, and leaveyou; but your age reassures me. I will not forget you.Wait."

　　"How long?"

　　"I must calculate our chances; I will give you the signal."

　　"But you will not leave me; you will come to me, or you willlet me come to you. We will escape, and if we cannot escapewe will talk; you of those whom you love, and I of thosewhom I love. You must love somebody?"

　　"No, I am alone in the world."

　　"Then you will love me. If you are young, I will be yourcomrade; if you are old, I will be your son. I have a fatherwho is seventy if he yet lives; I only love him and a younggirl called Mercedes. My father has not yet forgotten me, Iam sure, but God alone knows if she loves me still; I shalllove you as I loved my father."

　　"It is well," returned the voice; "to-morrow."

　　These few words were uttered with an accent that left nodoubt of his sincerity; Dantes rose, dispersed the fragmentswith the same precaution as before, and pushed his bed backagainst the wall. He then gave himself up to his happiness.He would no longer be alone. He was, perhaps, about toregain his liberty; at the worst, he would have a companion,and captivity that is shared is but half captivity. Plaintsmade in common are almost prayers, and prayers where two orthree are gathered together invoke the mercy of heaven.

　　All day Dantes walked up and down his cell. He sat downoccasionally on his bed, pressing his hand on his heart. Atthe slightest noise he bounded towards the door. Once ortwice the thought crossed his mind that he might beseparated from this unknown, whom he loved already; and thenhis mind was made up -- when the jailer moved his bed andstooped to examine the opening, he would kill him with hiswater jug. He would be condemned to die, but he was about todie of grief and despair when this miraculous noise recalledhim to life.

　　The jailer came in the evening. Dantes was on his bed. Itseemed to him that thus he better guarded the unfinishedopening. Doubtless there was a strange expression in hiseyes, for the jailer said, "Come, are you going mad again?"

　　Dantes did not answer; he feared that the emotion of hisvoice would betray him. The jailer went away shaking hishead. Night came; Dantes hoped that his neighbor wouldprofit by the silence to address him, but he was mistaken.The next morning, however, just as he removed his bed fromthe wall, he heard three knocks; he threw himself on hisknees.

　　"Is it you?" said he; "I am here."

　　"Is your jailer gone?"

　　"Yes," said Dantes; "he will not return until the evening;so that we have twelve hours before us."

　　"I can work, then?" said the voice.

　　"Oh, yes, yes; this instant, I entreat you."

　　In a moment that part of the floor on which Dantes wasresting his two hands, as he knelt with his head in theopening, suddenly gave way; he drew back smartly, while amass of stones and earth disappeared in a hole that openedbeneath the aperture he himself had formed. Then from thebottom of this passage, the depth of which it was impossibleto measure, he saw appear, first the head, then theshoulders, and lastly the body of a man, who sprang lightlyinto his cell.

　　Chapter 16A Learned Italian.

　　Seizing in his arms the friend so long and ardently desired,Dantes almost carried him towards the window, in order toobtain a better view of his features by the aid of theimperfect light that struggled through the grating.

　　He was a man of small stature, with hair blanched rather bysuffering and sorrow than by age. He had a deep-set,penetrating eye, almost buried beneath the thick grayeyebrow, and a long (and still black) beard reaching down tohis breast. His thin face, deeply furrowed by care, and thebold outline of his strongly marked features, betokened aman more accustomed to exercise his mental faculties thanhis physical strength. Large drops of perspiration were nowstanding on his brow, while the garments that hung about himwere so ragged that one could only guess at the pattern uponwhich they had originally been fashioned.

　　The stranger might have numbered sixty or sixty-five years;but a certain briskness and appearance of vigor in hismovements made it probable that he was aged more fromcaptivity than the course of time. He received theenthusiastic greeting of his young acquaintance with evidentpleasure, as though his chilled affections were rekindledand invigorated by his contact with one so warm and ardent.He thanked him with grateful cordiality for his kindlywelcome, although he must at that moment have been sufferingbitterly to find another dungeon where he had fondlyreckoned on discovering a means of regaining his liberty.

　　"Let us first see," said he, "whether it is possible toremove the traces of my entrance here -- our futuretranquillity depends upon our jailers being entirelyignorant of it." Advancing to the opening, he stooped andraised the stone easily in spite of its weight; then,fitting it into its place, he said, --

　　"You removed this stone very carelessly; but I suppose youhad no tools to aid you."

　　"Why," exclaimed Dantes, with astonishment, "do you possessany?"

　　"I made myself some; and with the exception of a file, Ihave all that are necessary, -- a chisel, pincers, andlever."

　　"Oh, how I should like to see these products of yourindustry and patience."

　　"Well, in the first place, here is my chisel." So saying, hedisplayed a sharp strong blade, with a handle made ofbeechwood.

　　"And with what did you contrive to make that?" inquiredDantes.

　　"With one of the clamps of my bedstead; and this very toolhas sufficed me to hollow out the road by which I camehither, a distance of about fifty feet."

　　"Fifty feet!" responded Dantes, almost terrified.

　　"Do not speak so loud, young man -- don't speak so loud. Itfrequently occurs in a state prison like this, that personsare stationed outside the doors of the cells purposely tooverhear the conversation of the prisoners."

　　"But they believe I am shut up alone here."

　　"That makes no difference."

　　"And you say that you dug your way a distance of fifty feetto get here?"

　　"I do; that is about the distance that separates yourchamber from mine; only, unfortunately, I did not curvearight; for want of the necessary geometrical instruments tocalculate my scale of proportion, instead of taking anellipsis of forty feet, I made it fifty. I expected, as Itold you, to reach the outer wall, pierce through it, andthrow myself into the sea; I have, however, kept along thecorridor on which your chamber opens, instead of goingbeneath it. My labor is all in vain, for I find that thecorridor looks into a courtyard filled with soldiers."

　　"That's true," said Dantes; "but the corridor you speak ofonly bounds one side of my cell; there are three others --do you know anything of their situation?"

　　"This one is built against the solid rock, and it would taketen experienced miners, duly furnished with the requisitetools, as many years to perforate it. This adjoins the lowerpart of the governor's apartments, and were we to work ourway through, we should only get into some lock-up cellars,where we must necessarily be recaptured. The fourth and lastside of your cell faces on -- faces on -- stop a minute, nowwhere does it face?"

　　The wall of which he spoke was the one in which was fixedthe loophole by which light was admitted to the chamber.This loophole, which gradually diminished in size as itapproached the outside, to an opening through which a childcould not have passed, was, for better security, furnishedwith three iron bars, so as to quiet all apprehensions evenin the mind of the most suspicious jailer as to thepossibility of a prisoner's escape. As the stranger askedthe question, he dragged the table beneath the window.

　　"Climb up," said he to Dantes. The young man obeyed, mountedon the table, and, divining the wishes of his companion,placed his back securely against the wall and held out bothhands. The stranger, whom as yet Dantes knew only by thenumber of his cell, sprang up with an agility by no means tobe expected in a person of his years, and, light and steadyon his feet as a cat or a lizard, climbed from the table tothe outstretched hands of Dantes, and from them to hisshoulders; then, bending double, for the ceiling of thedungeon prevented him from holding himself erect, he managedto slip his head between the upper bars of the window, so asto be able to command a perfect view from top to bottom.

　　An instant afterwards he hastily drew back his head, saying,"I thought so!" and sliding from the shoulders of Dantes asdextrously as he had ascended, he nimbly leaped from thetable to the ground.

　　"What was it that you thought?" asked the young mananxiously, in his turn descending from the table.

　　The elder prisoner pondered the matter. "Yes," said he atlength, "it is so. This side of your chamber looks out upona kind of open gallery, where patrols are continuallypassing, and sentries keep watch day and night."

　　"Are you quite sure of that?"

　　"Certain. I saw the soldier's shape and the top of hismusket; that made me draw in my head so quickly, for I wasfearful he might also see me."

　　"Well?" inquired Dantes.

　　"You perceive then the utter impossibility of escapingthrough your dungeon?"

　　"Then," pursued the young man eagerly --

　　"Then," answered the elder prisoner, "the will of God bedone!" and as the old man slowly pronounced those words, anair of profound resignation spread itself over his careworncountenance. Dantes gazed on the man who could thusphilosophically resign hopes so long and ardently nourishedwith an astonishment mingled with admiration.

　　"Tell me, I entreat of you, who and what you are?" said heat length; "never have I met with so remarkable a person asyourself."

　　"Willingly," answered the stranger; "if, indeed, you feelany curiosity respecting one, now, alas, powerless to aidyou in any way."

　　"Say not so; you can console and support me by the strengthof your own powerful mind. Pray let me know who you reallyare?"

　　The stranger smiled a melancholy smile. "Then listen," saidhe. "l am the Abbe Faria, and have been imprisoned as youknow in this Chateau d'If since the year 1811; previously towhich I had been confined for three years in the fortress ofFenestrelle. In the year 1811 I was transferred to Piedmontin France. It was at this period I learned that the destinywhich seemed subservient to every wish formed by Napoleon,had bestowed on him a son, named king of Rome even in hiscradle. I was very far then from expecting the change youhave just informed me of; namely, that four yearsafterwards, this colossus of power would be overthrown. Thenwho reigns in France at this moment -- Napoleon II.?"

　　"No, Louis XVIII."

　　"The brother of Louis XVII.! How inscrutable are the ways ofprovidence -- for what great and mysterious purpose has itpleased heaven to abase the man once so elevated, and raiseup him who was so abased?"

　　Dantes, whole attention was riveted on a man who could thusforget his own misfortunes while occupying himself with thedestinies of others.

　　"Yes, yes," continued he, "'Twill be the same as it was inEngland. After Charles I., Cromwell; after Cromwell, CharlesII., and then James II., and then some son-in-law orrelation, some Prince of Orange, a stadtholder who becomes aking. Then new concessions to the people, then aconstitution, then liberty. Ah, my friend!" said the abbe,turning towards Dantes, and surveying him with the kindlinggaze of a prophet, "you are young, you will see all thiscome to pass."

　　"Probably, if ever I get out of prison!"

　　"True," replied Faria, "we are prisoners; but I forget thissometimes, and there are even moments when my mental visiontransports me beyond these walls, and I fancy myself atliberty."

　　"But wherefore are you here?"

　　"Because in 1807 I dreamed of the very plan Napoleon triedto realize in 1811; because, like Machiavelli, I desired toalter the political face of Italy, and instead of allowingit to be split up into a quantity of petty principalities,each held by some weak or tyrannical ruler, I sought to formone large, compact, and powerful empire; and, lastly,because I fancied I had found my Caesar Borgia in a crownedsimpleton, who feigned to enter into my views only to betrayme. It was the plan of Alexander VI. and Clement VII., butit will never succeed now, for they attempted itfruitlessly, and Napoleon was unable to complete his work.Italy seems fated to misfortune." And the old man bowed hishead.

　　Dantes could not understand a man risking his life for suchmatters. Napoleon certainly he knew something of, inasmuchas he had seen and spoken with him; but of Clement VII. andAlexander VI. he knew nothing.

　　"Are you not," he asked, "the priest who here in the Chateaud'If is generally thought to be -- ill?"

　　"Mad, you mean, don't you?"

　　"I did not like to say so," answered Dantes, smiling.

　　"Well, then," resumed Faria with a bitter smile, "let meanswer your question in full, by acknowledging that I am thepoor mad prisoner of the Chateau d'If, for many yearspermitted to amuse the different visitors with what is saidto be my insanity; and, in all probability, I should bepromoted to the honor of making sport for the children, ifsuch innocent beings could be found in an abode devoted likethis to suffering and despair."

　　Dantes remained for a short time mute and motionless; atlength he said, -- "Then you abandon all hope of escape?"

　　"I perceive its utter impossibility; and I consider itimpious to attempt that which the Almighty evidently doesnot approve."

　　"Nay, be not discouraged. Would it not be expecting too muchto hope to succeed at your first attempt? Why not try tofind an opening in another direction from that which has sounfortunately failed?"

　　"Alas, it shows how little notion you can have of all it hascost me to effect a purpose so unexpectedly frustrated, thatyou talk of beginning over again. In the first place, I wasfour years making the tools I possess, and have been twoyears scraping and digging out earth, hard as graniteitself; then what toil and fatigue has it not been to removehuge stones I should once have deemed impossible to loosen.Whole days have I passed in these Titanic efforts,considering my labor well repaid if, by night-time I hadcontrived to carry away a square inch of this hard-boundcement, changed by ages into a substance unyielding as thestones themselves; then to conceal the mass of earth andrubbish I dug up, I was compelled to break through astaircase, and throw the fruits of my labor into the hollowpart of it; but the well is now so completely choked up,that I scarcely think it would be possible to add anotherhandful of dust without leading to discovery. Consider alsothat I fully believed I had accomplished the end and aim ofmy undertaking, for which I had so exactly husbanded mystrength as to make it just hold out to the termination ofmy enterprise; and now, at the moment when I reckoned uponsuccess, my hopes are forever dashed from me. No, I repeatagain, that nothing shall induce me to renew attemptsevidently at variance with the Almighty's pleasure."

　　Dantes held down his head, that the other might not see howjoy at the thought of having a companion outweighed thesympathy he felt for the failure of the abbe's plans.

　　The abbe sank upon Edmond's bed. while Edmond himselfremained standing. Escape had never once occurred to him.There are, indeed, some things which appear so impossiblethat the mind does not dwell on them for an instant. Toundermine the ground for fifty feet -- to devote three yearsto a labor which, if successful, would conduct you to aprecipice overhanging the sea -- to plunge into the wavesfrom the height of fifty, sixty, perhaps a hundred feet, atthe risk of being dashed to pieces against the rocks, shouldyou have been fortunate enough to have escaped the fire ofthe sentinels; and even, supposing all these perils past,then to have to swim for your life a distance of at leastthree miles ere you could reach the shore -- weredifficulties so startling and formidable that Dantes hadnever even dreamed of such a scheme, resigning himselfrather to death. But the sight of an old man clinging tolife with so desperate a courage, gave a fresh turn to hisideas, and inspired him with new courage. Another, older andless strong than he, had attempted what he had not hadsufficient resolution to undertake, and had failed onlybecause of an error in calculation. This same person, withalmost incredible patience and perseverance, had contrivedto provide himself with tools requisite for so unparalleledan attempt. Another had done all this; why, then, was itimpossible to Dantes? Faria had dug his way through fiftyfeet, Dantes would dig a hundred; Faria, at the age offifty, had devoted three years to the task; he, who was buthalf as old, would sacrifice six; Faria, a priest andsavant, had not shrunk from the idea of risking his life bytrying to swim a distance of three miles to one of theislands -- Daume, Rattonneau, or Lemaire; should a hardysailer, an experienced diver, like himself, shrink from asimilar task; should he, who had so often for mereamusement's sake plunged to the bottom of the sea to fetchup the bright coral branch, hesitate to entertain the sameproject? He could do it in an hour, and how many times hadhe, for pure pastime, continued in the water for more thantwice as long! At once Dantes resolved to follow the braveexample of his energetic companion, and to remember thatwhat has once been done may be done again.

　　After continuing some time in profound meditation, the youngman suddenly exclaimed, "I have found what you were insearch of!"

　　Faria started: "Have you, indeed?" cried he, raising hishead with quick anxiety; "pray, let me know what it is youhave discovered?"

　　"The corridor through which you have bored your way from thecell you occupy here, extends in the same direction as theouter gallery, does it not?"

　　"It does."

　　"And is not above fifteen feet from it?"

　　"About that."

　　"Well, then, I will tell you what we must do. We must piercethrough the corridor by forming a side opening about themiddle, as it were the top part of a cross. This time youwill lay your plans more accurately; we shall get out intothe gallery you have described; kill the sentinel who guardsit, and make our escape. All we require to insure success iscourage, and that you possess, and strength, which I am notdeficient in; as for patience, you have abundantly provedyours -- you shall now see me prove mine."

　　"One instant, my dear friend," replied the abbe; "it isclear you do not understand the nature of the courage withwhich I am endowed, and what use I intend making of mystrength. As for patience, I consider that I have abundantlyexercised that in beginning every morning the task of thenight before, and every night renewing the task of the day.But then, young man (and I pray of you to give me your fullattention), then I thought I could not be doing anythingdispleasing to the Almighty in trying to set an innocentbeing at liberty -- one who had committed no offence, andmerited not condemnation."

　　"And have your notions changed?" asked Dantes with muchsurprise; "do you think yourself more guilty in making theattempt since you have encountered me?"

　　"No; neither do I wish to incur guilt. Hitherto I havefancied myself merely waging war against circumstances, notmen. I have thought it no sin to bore through a wall, ordestroy a staircase; but I cannot so easily persuade myselfto pierce a heart or take away a life." A slight movement ofsurprise escaped Dantes.

　　"Is it possible," said he, "that where your liberty is atstake you can allow any such scruple to deter you fromobtaining it?"

　　"Tell me," replied Faria, "what has hindered you fromknocking down your jailer with a piece of wood torn fromyour bedstead, dressing yourself in his clothes, andendeavoring to escape?"

　　"Simply the fact that the idea never occurred to me,"answered Dantes.

　　"Because," said the old man, "the natural repugnance to thecommission of such a crime prevented you from thinking ofit; and so it ever is because in simple and allowable thingsour natural instincts keep us from deviating from the strictline of duty. The tiger, whose nature teaches him to delightin shedding blood, needs but the sense of smell to show himwhen his prey is within his reach, and by following thisinstinct he is enabled to measure the leap necessary topermit him to spring on his victim; but man, on thecontrary, loathes the idea of blood -- it is not alone thatthe laws of social life inspire him with a shrinking dreadof taking life; his natural construction and physiologicalformation" --

　　Dantes was confused and silent at this explanation of thethoughts which had unconsciously been working in his mind,or rather soul; for there are two distinct sorts of ideas,those that proceed from the head and those that emanate fromthe heart.

　　"Since my imprisonment," said Faria, "I have thought overall the most celebrated cases of escape on record. They haverarely been successful. Those that have been crowned withfull success have been long meditated upon, and carefullyarranged; such, for instance, as the escape of the Duc deBeaufort from the Chateau de Vincennes, that of the AbbeDubuquoi from For l'Eveque; of Latude from the Bastille.Then there are those for which chance sometimes affordsopportunity, and those are the best of all. Let us,therefore, wait patiently for some favorable moment, andwhen it presents itself, profit by it."

　　"Ah," said Dantes, "you might well endure the tedious delay;you were constantly employed in the task you set yourself,and when weary with toil, you had your hopes to refresh andencourage you."

　　"I assure you," replied the old man, "I did not turn to thatsource for recreation or support."

　　"What did you do then?"

　　"I wrote or studied."

　　"Were you then permitted the use of pens, ink, and paper?"

　　"Oh, no," answered the abbe; "I had none but what I made formyself."

　　"You made paper, pens and ink?"

　　"Yes."

　　Dantes gazed with admiration, but he had some difficulty inbelieving. Faria saw this.

　　"When you pay me a visit in my cell, my young friend," saidhe, "I will show you an entire work, the fruits of thethoughts and reflections of my whole life; many of themmeditated over in the shades of the Coloseum at Rome, at thefoot of St. Mark's column at Venice, and on the borders ofthe Arno at Florence, little imagining at the time that theywould be arranged in order within the walls of the Chateaud'If. The work I speak of is called `A Treatise on thePossibility of a General Monarchy in Italy,' and will makeone large quarto volume."

　　"And on what have you written all this?"

　　"On two of my shirts. I invented a preparation that makeslinen as smooth and as easy to write on as parchment."

　　"You are, then, a chemist?"

　　"Somewhat; I know Lavoisier, and was the intimate friend ofCabanis."

　　"But for such a work you must have needed books -- had youany?"

　　"I had nearly five thousand volumes in my library at Rome;but after reading them over many times, I found out thatwith one hundred and fifty well-chosen books a manpossesses, if not a complete summary of all human knowledge,at least all that a man need really know. I devoted threeyears of my life to reading and studying these one hundredand fifty volumes, till I knew them nearly by heart; so thatsince I have been in prison, a very slight effort of memoryhas enabled me to recall their contents as readily as thoughthe pages were open before me. I could recite you the wholeof Thucydides, Xenophon, Plutarch, Titus Livius, Tacitus,Strada, Jornandes, Dante, Montaigne, Shakspeare, Spinoza,Machiavelli, and Bossuet. I name only the most important."

　　"You are, doubtless, acquainted with a variety of languages,so as to have been able to read all these?"

　　"Yes, I speak five of the modern tongues -- that is to say,German, French, Italian, English, and Spanish; by the aid ofancient Greek I learned modern Greek -- I don't speak it sowell as I could wish, but I am still trying to improvemyself."

　　"Improve yourself!" repeated Dantes; "why, how can youmanage to do so?"

　　"Why, I made a vocabulary of the words I knew; turned,returned, and arranged them, so as to enable me to expressmy thoughts through their medium. I know nearly one thousandwords, which is all that is absolutely necessary, although Ibelieve there are nearly one hundred thousand in thedictionaries. I cannot hope to be very fluent, but Icertainly should have no difficulty in explaining my wantsand wishes; and that would be quite as much as I should everrequire."

　　Stronger grew the wonder of Dantes, who almost fancied hehad to do with one gifted with supernatural powers; stillhoping to find some imperfection which might bring him downto a level with human beings, he added, "Then if you werenot furnished with pens, how did you manage to write thework you speak of?"

　　"I made myself some excellent ones, which would beuniversally preferred to all others if once known. You areaware what huge whitings are served to us on maigre days.Well, I selected the cartilages of the heads of thesefishes, and you can scarcely imagine the delight with whichI welcomed the arrival of each Wednesday, Friday, andSaturday, as affording me the means of increasing my stockof pens; for I will freely confess that my historical laborshave been my greatest solace and relief. While retracing thepast, I forget the present; and traversing at will the pathof history I cease to remember that I am myself a prisoner."

　　"But the ink," said Dantes; "of what did you make your ink?"

　　"There was formerly a fireplace in my dungeon," repliedFaria, "but it was closed up long ere I became an occupantof this prison. Still, it must have been many years in use,for it was thickly covered with a coating of soot; this sootI dissolved in a portion of the wine brought to me everySunday, and I assure you a better ink cannot be desired. Forvery important notes, for which closer attention isrequired, I pricked one of my fingers, and wrote with my ownblood."

　　"And when," asked Dantes, "may I see all this?"

　　"Whenever you please," replied the abbe.

　　"Oh, then let it be directly!" exclaimed the young man.

　　"Follow me, then," said the abbe, as he re-entered thesubterranean passage, in which he soon disappeared, followedby Dantes.

　　Chapter 17The Abbe's Chamber.

　　After having passed with tolerable ease through thesubterranean passage, which, however, did not admit of theirholding themselves erect, the two friends reached thefurther end of the corridor, into which the abbe's cellopened; from that point the passage became much narrower,and barely permitted one to creep through on hands andknees. The floor of the abbe's cell was paved, and it hadbeen by raising one of the stones in the most obscure cornerthat Faria had to been able to commence the laborious taskof which Dantes had witnessed the completion.

　　As he entered the chamber of his friend, Dantes cast aroundone eager and searching glance in quest of the expectedmarvels, but nothing more than common met his view.

　　"It is well," said the abbe; "we have some hours before us-- it is now just a quarter past twelve o'clock."Instinctively Dantes turned round to observe by what watchor clock the abbe had been able so accurately to specify thehour.

　　"Look at this ray of light which enters by my window," saidthe abbe, "and then observe the lines traced on the wall.Well, by means of these lines, which are in accordance withthe double motion of the earth, and the ellipse it describesround the sun, I am enabled to ascertain the precise hourwith more minuteness than if I possessed a watch; for thatmight be broken or deranged in its movements, while the sunand earth never vary in their appointed paths."

　　This last explanation was wholly lost upon Dantes, who hadalways imagined, from seeing the sun rise from behind themountains and set in the Mediterranean, that it moved, andnot the earth. A double movement of the globe he inhabited,and of which he could feel nothing, appeared to himperfectly impossible. Each word that fell from hiscompanion's lips seemed fraught with the mysteries ofscience, as worthy of digging out as the gold and diamondsin the mines of Guzerat and Golconda, which he could justrecollect having visited during a voyage made in hisearliest youth.

　　"Come," said he to the abbe, "I am anxious to see yourtreasures."

　　The abbe smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace,raised, by the help of his chisel, a long stone, which haddoubtless been the hearth, beneath which was a cavity ofconsiderable depth, serving as a safe depository of thearticles mentioned to Dantes.

　　"What do you wish to see first?" asked the abbe.

　　"Oh, your great work on the monarchy of Italy!"

　　Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or fourrolls of linen, laid one over the other, like folds ofpapyrus. These rolls consisted of slips of cloth about fourinches wide and eighteen long; they were all carefullynumbered and closely covered with writing, so legible thatDantes could easily read it, as well as make out the sense-- it being in Italian, a language he, as a Provencal,perfectly understood.

　　"There," said he, "there is the work complete. I wrote theword finis at the end of the sixty-eighth strip about a weekago. I have torn up two of my shirts, and as manyhandkerchiefs as I was master of, to complete the preciouspages. Should I ever get out of prison and find in all Italya printer courageous enough to publish what I have composed,my literary reputation is forever secured."

　　"I see," answered Dantes. "Now let me behold the curiouspens with which you have written your work."

　　"Look!" said Faria, showing to the young man a slender stickabout six inches long, and much resembling the size of thehandle of a fine painting-brush, to the end of which wastied, by a piece of thread, one of those cartilages of whichthe abbe had before spoken to Dantes; it was pointed, anddivided at the nib like an ordinary pen. Dantes examined itwith intense admiration, then looked around to see theinstrument with which it had been shaped so correctly intoform.

　　"Ah, yes," said Faria; "the penknife. That's my masterpiece.I made it, as well as this larger knife, out of an old ironcandlestick." The penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; asfor the other knife, it would serve a double purpose, andwith it one could cut and thrust.

　　Dantes examined the various articles shown to him with thesame attention that he had bestowed on the curiosities andstrange tools exhibited in the shops at Marseilles as theworks of the savages in the South Seas from whence they hadbeen brought by the different trading vessels.

　　"As for the ink," said Faria, "I told you how I managed toobtain that -- and I only just make it from time to time, asI require it."

　　"One thing still puzzles me," observed Dantes, "and that ishow you managed to do all this by daylight?"

　　"I worked at night also," replied Faria.

　　"Night! -- why, for heaven's sake, are your eyes like cats',that you can see to work in the dark?"

　　"Indeed they are not; but God his supplied man with theintelligence that enables him to overcome the limitations ofnatural conditions. I furnished myself with a light."

　　"You did? Pray tell me how."

　　"l separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it,and so made oil -- here is my lamp." So saying, the abbeexhibited a sort of torch very similar to those used inpublic illuminations.

　　"But light?"

　　"Here are two flints and a piece of burnt linen."

　　"And matches?"

　　"I pretended that I had a disorder of the skin, and askedfor a little sulphur, which was readily supplied." Danteslaid the different things he had been looking at on thetable, and stood with his head drooping on his breast, asthough overwhelmed by the perseverance and strength ofFaria's mind.

　　"You have not seen all yet," continued Faria, "for I did notthink it wise to trust all my treasures in the samehiding-place. Let us shut this one up." They put the stoneback in its place; the abbe sprinkled a little dust over itto conceal the traces of its having been removed, rubbed hisfoot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as theother, and then, going towards his bed, he removed it fromthe spot it stood in. Behind the head of the bed, andconcealed by a stone fitting in so closely as to defy allsuspicion, was a hollow space, and in this space a ladder ofcords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length. Dantesclosely and eagerly examined it; he found it firm, solid,and compact enough to bear any weight.

　　"Who supplied you with the materials for making thiswonderful work?"

　　"I tore up several of my shirts, and ripped out the seams inthe sheets of my bed, during my three years' imprisonment atFenestrelle; and when I was removed to the Chateau d'If, Imanaged to bring the ravellings with me, so that I have beenable to finish my work here."

　　"And was it not discovered that your sheets were unhemmed?"

　　"Oh, no, for when I had taken out the thread I required, Ihemmed the edges over again."

　　"With what?"

　　"With this needle," said the abbe, as, opening his raggedvestments, he showed Dantes a long, sharp fish-bone, with asmall perforated eye for the thread, a small portion ofwhich still remained in it. "I once thought," continuedFaria, "of removing these iron bars, and letting myself downfrom the window, which, as you see, is somewhat wider thanyours, although I should have enlarged it still morepreparatory to my flight; however, I discovered that Ishould merely have dropped into a sort of inner court, and Itherefore renounced the project altogether as too full ofrisk and danger. Nevertheless, I carefully preserved myladder against one of those unforeseen opportunities ofwhich I spoke just now, and which sudden chance frequentlybrings about." While affecting to be deeply engaged inexamining the ladder, the mind of Dantes was, in fact,busily occupied by the idea that a person so intelligent,ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbe might probably beable to solve the dark mystery of his own misfortunes, wherehe himself could see nothing.

　　"What are you thinking of?" asked the abbe smilingly,imputing the deep abstraction in which his visitor wasplunged to the excess of his awe and wonder.

　　"I was reflecting, in the first place," replied Dantes,"upon the enormous degree of intelligence and ability youmust have employed to reach the high perfection to which youhave attained. What would you not have accomplished if youhad been free?"

　　"Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain wouldprobably, in a state of freedom, have evaporated in athousand follies; misfortune is needed to bring to light thetreasures of the human intellect. Compression is needed toexplode gunpowder. Captivity has brought my mental facultiesto a focus; and you are well aware that from the collisionof clouds electricity is produced -- from electricity,lightning, from lightning, illumination."

　　"No," replied Dantes. "I know nothing. Some of your wordsare to me quite empty of meaning. You must be blessed indeedto possess the knowledge you have."

　　The abbe smiled. "Well," said he, "but you had anothersubject for your thoughts; did you not say so just now?"

　　"I did!"

　　"You have told me as yet but one of them -- let me hear theother."

　　"It was this, -- that while you had related to me all theparticulars of your past life, you were perfectlyunacquainted with mine."

　　"Your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficientlength to admit of your having passed through any veryimportant events."

　　"It has been long enough to inflict on me a great andundeserved misfortune. I would fain fix the source of it onman that I may no longer vent reproaches upon heaven."

　　"Then you profess ignorance of the crime with which you arecharged?"

　　"I do, indeed; and this I swear by the two beings most dearto me upon earth, -- my father and Mercedes."

　　"Come," said the abbe, closing his hiding-place, and pushingthe bed back to its original situation, "let me hear yourstory."

　　Dantes obeyed, and commenced what he called his history, butwhich consisted only of the account of a voyage to India,and two or three voyages to the Levant until he arrived atthe recital of his last cruise, with the death of CaptainLeclere, and the receipt of a packet to be delivered byhimself to the grand marshal; his interview with thatpersonage, and his receiving, in place of the packetbrought, a letter addressed to a Monsieur Noirtier -- hisarrival at Marseilles, and interview with his father -- hisaffection for Mercedes, and their nuptual feast -- hisarrest and subsequent examination, his temporary detentionat the Palais de Justice, and his final imprisonment in theChateau d'If. From this point everything was a blank toDantes -- he knew nothing more, not even the length of timehe had been imprisoned. His recital finished, the abbereflected long and earnestly.

　　"There is," said he, at the end of his meditations, "aclever maxim, which bears upon what I was saying to you somelittle while ago, and that is, that unless wicked ideas takeroot in a naturally depraved mind, human nature, in a rightand wholesome state, revolts at crime. Still, from anartificial civilization have originated wants, vices, andfalse tastes, which occasionally become so powerful as tostifle within us all good feelings, and ultimately to leadus into guilt and wickedness. From this view of things,then, comes the axiom that if you visit to discover theauthor of any bad action, seek first to discover the personto whom the perpetration of that bad action could be in anyway advantageous. Now, to apply it in your case, -- to whomcould your disappearance have been serviceable?"

　　"To no one, by heaven! I was a very insignificant person."

　　"Do not speak thus, for your reply evinces neither logic norphilosophy; everything is relative, my dear young friend,from the king who stands in the way of his successor, to theemployee who keeps his rival out of a place. Now, in theevent of the king's death, his successor inherits a crown,-- when the employee dies, the supernumerary steps into hisshoes, and receives his salary of twelve thousand livres.Well, these twelve thousand livres are his civil list, andare as essential to him as the twelve millions of a king.Every one, from the highest to the lowest degree, has hisplace on the social ladder, and is beset by stormy passionsand conflicting interests, as in Descartes' theory ofpressure and impulsion. But these forces increase as we gohigher, so that we have a spiral which in defiance of reasonrests upon the apex and not on the base. Now let us returnto your particular world. You say you were on the point ofbeing made captain of the Pharaon?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And about to become the husband of a young and lovelygirl?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Now, could any one have had any interest in preventing theaccomplishment of these two things? But let us first settlethe question as to its being the interest of any one tohinder you from being captain of the Pharaon. What say you?"

　　"I cannot believe such was the case. I was generally likedon board, and had the sailors possessed the right ofselecting a captain themselves, I feel convinced theirchoice would have fallen on me. There was only one personamong the crew who had any feeling of ill-will towards me. Ihad quarelled with him some time previously, and had evenchallenged him to fight me; but he refused."

　　"Now we are getting on. And what was this man's name?"

　　"Danglars."

　　"What rank did he hold on board?"

　　"He was supercargo."

　　"And had you been captain, should you have retained him inhis employment?"

　　"Not if the choice had remained with me, for I hadfrequently observed inaccuracies in his accounts."

　　"Good again! Now then, tell me, was any person presentduring your last conversation with Captain Leclere?"

　　"No; we were quite alone."

　　"Could your conversation have been overheard by any one?"

　　"It might, for the cabin door was open -- and -- stay; now Irecollect, -- Danglars himself passed by just as CaptainLeclere was giving me the packet for the grand marshal."

　　"That's better," cried the abbe; "now we are on the rightscent. Did you take anybody with you when you put into theport of Elba?"

　　"Nobody."

　　"Somebody there received your packet, and gave you a letterin place of it, I think?"

　　"Yes; the grand marshal did."

　　"And what did you do with that letter?"

　　"Put it into my portfolio."

　　"You had your portfolio with you, then? Now, how could asailor find room in his pocket for a portfolio large enoughto contain an official letter?"

　　"You are right; it was left on board."

　　"Then it was not till your return to the ship that you putthe letter in the portfolio?"

　　"No."

　　"And what did you do with this same letter while returningfrom Porto-Ferrajo to the vessel?"

　　"I carried it in my hand."

　　"So that when you went on board the Pharaon, everybody couldsee that you held a letter in your hand?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Danglars, as well as the rest?"

　　"Danglars, as well as others."

　　"Now, listen to me, and try to recall every circumstanceattending your arrest. Do you recollect the words in whichthe information against you was formulated?"

　　"Oh yes, I read it over three times, and the words sankdeeply into my memory."

　　"Repeat it to me."

　　Dantes paused a moment, then said, "This is it, word forword: `The king's attorney is informed by a friend to thethrone and religion, that one Edmond Dantes, mate on boardthe Pharaon, this day arrived from Smyrna, after havingtouched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, has been intrusted byMurat with a packet for the usurper; again, by the usurper,with a letter for the Bonapartist Club in Paris. This proofof his guilt may be procured by his immediate arrest, as theletter will be found either about his person, at hisfather's residence, or in his cabin on board the Pharaon.'"The abbe shrugged his shoulders. "The thing is clear asday," said he; "and you must have had a very confidingnature, as well as a good heart, not to have suspected theorigin of the whole affair."

　　"Do you really think so? Ah, that would indeed be infamous."

　　"How did Danglars usually write?"

　　"In a handsome, running hand."

　　"And how was the anonymous letter written?"

　　"Backhanded." Again the abbe smiled. "Disguised."

　　"It was very boldly written, if disguised."

　　"Stop a bit," said the abbe, taking up what he called hispen, and, after dipping it into the ink, he wrote on a pieceof prepared linen, with his left hand, the first two orthree words of the accusation. Dantes drew back, and gazedon the abbe with a sensation almost amounting to terror.

　　"How very astonishing!" cried he at length. "Why yourwriting exactly resembles that of the accusation."

　　"Simply because that accusation had been written with theleft hand; and I have noticed that" --

　　"What?"

　　"That while the writing of different persons done with theright hand varies, that performed with the left hand isinvariably uniform."

　　"You have evidently seen and observed everything."

　　"Let us proceed."

　　"Oh, yes, yes!"

　　"Now as regards the second question."

　　"I am listening."

　　"Was there any person whose interest it was to prevent yourmarriage with Mercedes?"

　　"Yes; a young man who loved her."

　　"And his name was" --

　　"Fernand."

　　"That is a Spanish name, I think?"

　　"He was a Catalan."

　　"You imagine him capable of writing the letter?"

　　"Oh, no; he would more likely have got rid of me by stickinga knife into me."

　　"That is in strict accordance with the Spanish character; anassassination they will unhesitatingly commit, but an act ofcowardice, never."

　　"Besides," said Dantes, "the various circumstances mentionedin the letter were wholly unknown to him."

　　"You had never spoken of them yourself to any one?"

　　"To no one."

　　"Not even to your mistress?"

　　"No, not even to my betrothed."

　　"Then it is Danglars."

　　"I feel quite sure of it now."

　　"Wait a little. Pray, was Danglars acquainted with Fernand?"

　　"No -- yes, he was. Now I recollect" --

　　"What?"

　　"To have seen them both sitting at table together under anarbor at Pere Pamphile's the evening before the day fixedfor my wedding. They were in earnest conversation. Danglarswas joking in a friendly way, but Fernand looked pale andagitated."

　　"Were they alone?"

　　"There was a third person with them whom I knew perfectlywell, and who had, in all probability made theiracquaintance; he was a tailor named Caderousse, but he wasvery drunk. Stay! -- stay! -- How strange that it should nothave occurred to me before! Now I remember quite well, thaton the table round which they were sitting were pens, ink,and paper. Oh, the heartless, treacherous scoundrels!"exclaimed Dantes, pressing his hand to his throbbing brows.

　　"Is there anything else I can assist you in discovering,besides the villany of your friends?" inquired the abbe witha laugh.

　　"Yes, yes," replied Dantes eagerly; "I would beg of you, whosee so completely to the depths of things, and to whom thegreatest mystery seems but an easy riddle, to explain to mehow it was that I underwent no second examination, was neverbrought to trial, and, above all, was condemned without everhaving had sentence passed on me?"

　　"That is altogether a different and more serious matter,"responded the abbe. "The ways of justice are frequently toodark and mysterious to be easily penetrated. All we havehitherto done in the matter has been child's play. If youwish me to enter upon the more difficult part of thebusiness, you must assist me by the most minute informationon every point."

　　"Pray ask me whatever questions you please; for, in goodtruth, you see more clearly into my life than I do myself."

　　"In the first place, then, who examined you, -- the king'sattorney, his deputy, or a magistrate?"

　　"The deputy."

　　"Was he young or old?"

　　"About six or seven and twenty years of age, I should say."

　　"So," answered the abbe. "Old enough to be ambitions, buttoo young to be corrupt. And how did he treat you?"

　　"With more of mildness than severity."

　　"Did you tell him your whole story?"

　　"I did."

　　"And did his conduct change at all in the course of yourexamination?"

　　"He did appear much disturbed when he read the letter thathad brought me into this scrape. He seemed quite overcome bymy misfortune."

　　"By your misfortune?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then you feel quite sure that it was your misfortune hedeplored?"

　　"He gave me one great proof of his sympathy, at any rate."

　　"And that?"

　　"He burnt the sole evidence that could at all havecriminated me."

　　"What? the accusation?"

　　"No; the letter."

　　"Are you sure?"

　　"I saw it done."

　　"That alters the case. This man might, after all, be agreater scoundrel than you have thought possible."

　　"Upon my word," said Dantes, "you make me shudder. Is theworld filled with tigers and crocodiles?"

　　"Yes; and remember that two-legged tigers and crocodiles aremore dangerous than the others."

　　"Never mind; let us go on."

　　"With all my heart! You tell me he burned the letter?"

　　"He did; saying at the same time, `You see I thus destroythe only proof existing against you.'"

　　"This action is somewhat too sublime to be natural."

　　"You think so?"

　　"I am sure of it. To whom was this letter addressed?"

　　"To M. Noirtier, No. 13 Coq-Heron, Paris."

　　"Now can you conceive of any interest that your heroicdeputy could possibly have had in the destruction of thatletter?"

　　"Why, it is not altogether impossible he might have had, forhe made me promise several times never to speak of thatletter to any one, assuring me he so advised me for my owninterest; and, more than this, he insisted on my taking asolemn oath never to utter the name mentioned in theaddress."

　　"Noirtier!" repeated the abbe; "Noirtier! -- I knew a personof that name at the court of the Queen of Etruria, -- aNoirtier, who had been a Girondin during the Revolution!What was your deputy called?"

　　"De Villefort!" The abbe burst into a fit of laughter, whileDantes gazed on him in utter astonishment.

　　"What ails you?" said he at length.

　　"Do you see that ray of sunlight?"

　　"I do."

　　"Well, the whole thing is more clear to me than that sunbeamis to you. Poor fellow! poor young man! And you tell me thismagistrate expressed great sympathy and commiseration foryou?"

　　"He did."

　　"And the worthy man destroyed your compromising letter?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And then made you swear never to utter the name ofNoirtier?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Why, you poor short-sighted simpleton, can you not guesswho this Noirtier was, whose very name he was so careful tokeep concealed? Noirtier was his father."

　　Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Dantes, or hellopened its yawning gulf before him, he could not have beenmore completely transfixed with horror than he was at thesound of these unexpected words. Starting up, he clasped hishands around his head as though to prevent his very brainfrom bursting, and exclaimed, "His father! his father!"

　　"Yes, his father," replied the abbe; "his right name wasNoirtier de Villefort." At this instant a bright light shotthrough the mind of Dantes, and cleared up all that had beendark and obscure before. The change that had come overVillefort during the examination, the destruction of theletter, the exacted promise, the almost supplicating tonesof the magistrate, who seemed rather to implore mercy thanto pronounce punishment, -- all returned with a stunningforce to his memory. He cried out, and staggered against thewall like a drunken man, then he hurried to the opening thatled from the abbe's cell to his own, and said, "I must bealone, to think over all this."

　　When he regained his dungeon, he threw himself on his bed,where the turnkey found him in the evening visit, sittingwith fixed gaze and contracted features, dumb and motionlessas a statue. During these hours of profound meditation,which to him had seemed only minutes, he had formed afearful resolution, and bound himself to its fulfilment by asolemn oath.

　　Dantes was at length roused from his revery by the voice ofFaria, who, having also been visited by his jailer, had cometo invite his fellow-sufferer to share his supper. Thereputation of being out of his mind, though harmlessly andeven amusingly so, had procured for the abbe unusualprivileges. He was supplied with bread of a finer, whiterquality than the usual prison fare, and even regaled eachSunday with a small quantity of wine. Now this was a Sunday,and the abbe had come to ask his young companion to sharethe luxuries with him. Dantes followed; his features were nolonger contracted, and now wore their usual expression, butthere was that in his whole appearance that bespoke one whohad come to a fixed and desperate resolve. Faria bent on himhis penetrating eye: "I regret now," said he, "having helpedyou in your late inquiries, or having given you theinformation I did."

　　"Why so?" inquired Dantes.

　　"Because it has instilled a new passion in your heart --that of vengeance."

　　Dantes smiled. "Let us talk of something else," said he.

　　Again the abbe looked at him, then mournfully shook hishead; but in accordance with Dantes' request, he began tospeak of other matters. The elder prisoner was one of thosepersons whose conversation, like that of all who haveexperienced many trials, contained many useful and importanthints as well as sound information; but it was neveregotistical, for the unfortunate man never alluded to hisown sorrows. Dantes listened with admiring attention to allhe said; some of his remarks corresponded with what healready knew, or applied to the sort of knowledge hisnautical life had enabled him to acquire. A part of the goodabbe's words, however, were wholly incomprehensible to him;but, like the aurora which guides the navigator in northernlatitudes, opened new vistas to the inquiring mind of thelistener, and gave fantastic glimpses of new horizons,enabling him justly to estimate the delight an intellectualmind would have in following one so richly gifted as Fariaalong the heights of truth, where he was so much at home.

　　"You must teach me a small part of what you know," saidDantes, "if only to prevent your growing weary of me. I canwell believe that so learned a person as yourself wouldprefer absolute solitude to being tormented with the companyof one as ignorant and uninformed as myself. If you willonly agree to my request, I promise you never to mentionanother word about escaping." The abbe smiled. "Alas, myboy," said he, "human knowledge is confined within verynarrow limits; and when I have taught you mathematics,physics, history, and the three or four modern languageswith which I am acquainted, you will know as much as I domyself. Now, it will scarcely require two years for me tocommunicate to you the stock of learning I possess."

　　"Two years!" exclaimed Dantes; "do you really believe I canacquire all these things in so short a time?"

　　"Not their application, certainly, but their principles youmay; to learn is not to know; there are the learners and thelearned. Memory makes the one, philosophy the other."

　　"But cannot one learn philosophy?"

　　"Philosophy cannot be taught; it is the application of thesciences to truth; it is like the golden cloud in which theMessiah went up into heaven."

　　"Well, then," said Dantes, "What shall you teach me first? Iam in a hurry to begin. I want to learn."

　　"Everything," said the abbe. And that very evening theprisoners sketched a plan of education, to be entered uponthe following day. Dantes possessed a prodigious memory,combined with an astonishing quickness and readiness ofconception; the mathematical turn of his mind rendered himapt at all kinds of calculation, while his naturallypoetical feelings threw a light and pleasing veil over thedry reality of arithmetical computation, or the rigidseverity of geometry. He already knew Italian, and had alsopicked up a little of the Romaic dialect during voyages tothe East; and by the aid of these two languages he easilycomprehended the construction of all the others, so that atthe end of six mouths he began to speak Spanish, English,and German. In strict accordance with the promise made tothe abbe, Dantes spoke no more of escape. Perhaps thedelight his studies afforded him left no room for suchthoughts; perhaps the recollection that he had pledged hisword (on which his sense of honor was keen) kept him fromreferring in any way to the possibilities of flight. Days,even months, passed by unheeded in one rapid and instructivecourse. At the end of a year Dantes was a new man. Dantesobserved, however, that Faria, in spite of the relief hissociety afforded, daily grew sadder; one thought seemedincessantly to harass and distract his mind. Sometimes hewould fall into long reveries, sigh heavily andinvoluntarily, then suddenly rise, and, with folded arms,begin pacing the confined space of his dungeon. One day hestopped all at once, and exclaimed, "Ah, if there were nosentinel!"

　　"There shall not be one a minute longer than you please,"said Dantes, who had followed the working of his thoughts asaccurately as though his brain were enclosed in crystal soclear as to display its minutest operations.

　　"I have already told you," answered the abbe, "that I loathethe idea of shedding blood."

　　"And yet the murder, if you choose to call it so, would besimply a measure of self-preservation."

　　"No matter! I could never agree to it."

　　"Still, you have thought of it?"

　　"Incessantly, alas!" cried the abbe.

　　"And you have discovered a means of regaining our freedom,have you not?" asked Dantes eagerly.

　　"I have; if it were only possible to place a deaf and blindsentinel in the gallery beyond us."

　　"He shall be both blind and deaf," replied the young man,with an air of determination that made his companionshudder.

　　"No, no," cried the abbe; "impossible!" Dantes endeavored torenew the subject; the abbe shook his head in token ofdisapproval, and refused to make any further response. Threemonths passed away.

　　"Are you strong?" the abbe asked one day of Dantes. Theyoung man, in reply, took up the chisel, bent it into theform of a horseshoe, and then as readily straightened it.

　　"And will you engage not to do any harm to the sentry,except as a last resort?"

　　"I promise on my honor."

　　"Then," said the abbe, "we may hope to put our design intoexecution."

　　"And how long shall we be in accomplishing the necessarywork?"

　　"At least a year."

　　"And shall we begin at once?"

　　"At once."

　　"We have lost a year to no purpose!" cried Dantes.

　　"Do you consider the last twelve months to have beenwasted?" asked the abbe.

　　"Forgive me!" cried Edmond, blushing deeply.

　　"Tut, tut!" answered the abbe, "man is but man after all,and you are about the best specimen of the genus I have everknown. Come, let me show you my plan." The abbe then showedDantes the sketch he had made for their escape. It consistedof a plan of his own cell and that of Dantes, with thepassage which united them. In this passage he proposed todrive a level as they do in mines; this level would bringthe two prisoners immediately beneath the gallery where thesentry kept watch; once there, a large excavation would bemade, and one of the flag-stones with which the gallery waspaved be so completely loosened that at the desired momentit would give way beneath the feet of the soldier, who,stunned by his fall, would be immediately bound and gaggedby Dantes before he had power to offer any resistance. Theprisoners were then to make their way through one of thegallery windows, and to let themselves down from the outerwalls by means of the abbe's ladder of cords. Dantes' eyessparkled with joy, and he rubbed his hands with delight atthe idea of a plan so simple, yet apparently so certain tosucceed.

　　That very day the miners began their labors, with a vigorand alacrity proportionate to their long rest from fatigueand their hopes of ultimate success. Nothing interrupted theprogress of the work except the necessity that each wasunder of returning to his cell in anticipation of theturnkey's visits. They had learned to distinguish the almostimperceptible sound of his footsteps as he descended towardstheir dungeons, and happily, never failed of being preparedfor his coming. The fresh earth excavated during theirpresent work, and which would have entirely blocked up theold passage, was thrown, by degrees and with the utmostprecaution, out of the window in either Faria's or Dantes'cell, the rubbish being first pulverized so finely that thenight wind carried it far away without permitting thesmallest trace to remain. More than a year had been consumedin this undertaking, the only tools for which had been achisel, a knife, and a wooden lever; Faria still continuingto instruct Dantes by conversing with him, sometimes in onelanguage, sometimes in another; at others, relating to himthe history of nations and great men who from time to timehave risen to fame and trodden the path of glory.

　　The abbe was a man of the world, and had, moreover, mixed inthe first society of the day; he wore an air of melancholydignity which Dantes, thanks to the imitative powersbestowed on him by nature, easily acquired, as well as thatoutward polish and politeness he had before been wanting in,and which is seldom possessed except by those who have beenplaced in constant intercourse with persons of high birthand breeding. At the end of fifteen months the level wasfinished, and the excavation completed beneath the gallery,and the two workmen could distinctly hear the measured treadof the sentinel as he paced to and fro over their heads.

　　Compelled, as they were, to await a night sufficiently darkto favor their flight, they were obliged to defer theirfinal attempt till that auspicious moment should arrive;their greatest dread now was lest the stone through whichthe sentry was doomed to fall should give way before itsright time, and this they had in some measure providedagainst by propping it up with a small beam which they haddiscovered in the walls through which they had worked theirway. Dantes was occupied in arranging this piece of woodwhen he heard Faria, who had remained in Edmond's cell forthe purpose of cutting a peg to secure their rope-ladder,call to him in a tone indicative of great suffering. Danteshastened to his dungeon, where he found him standing in themiddle of the room, pale as death, his forehead streamingwith perspiration, and his hands clinched tightly together.

　　"Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Dantes, "what is the matter?what has happened?"

　　"Quick! quick!" returned the abbe, "listen to what I have tosay." Dantes looked in fear and wonder at the lividcountenance of Faria, whose eyes, already dull and sunken,were surrounded by purple circles, while his lips were whiteas those of a corpse, and his very hair seemed to stand onend.

　　"Tell me, I beseech you, what ails you?" cried Dantes,letting his chisel fall to the floor.

　　"Alas," faltered out the abbe, "all is over with me. I amseized with a terrible, perhaps mortal illness; I can feelthat the paroxysm is fast approaching. I had a similarattack the year previous to my imprisonment. This maladyadmits but of one remedy; I will tell you what that is. Gointo my cell as quickly as you can; draw out one of the feetthat support the bed; you will find it has been hollowed outfor the purpose of containing a small phial you will seethere half-filled with a red-looking fluid. Bring it to me-- or rather -- no, no! -- I may be found here, thereforehelp me back to my room while I have the strength to dragmyself along. Who knows what may happen, or how long theattack may last?"

　　In spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thussuddenly frustrated his hopes, Dantes did not lose hispresence of mind, but descended into the passage, dragginghis unfortunate companion with him; then, half-carrying,half-supporting him, he managed to reach the abbe's chamber,when he immediately laid the sufferer on his bed.

　　"Thanks," said the poor abbe, shivering as though his veinswere filled with ice. "I am about to be seized with a fit ofcatalepsy; when it comes to its height I shall probably liestill and motionless as though dead, uttering neither sighnor groan. On the other hand, the symptoms may be much moreviolent, and cause me to fall into fearful convulsions, foamat the mouth, and cry out loudly. Take care my cries are notheard, for if they are it is more than probable I should beremoved to another part of the prison, and we be separatedforever. When I become quite motionless, cold, and rigid asa corpse, then, and not before, -- be careful about this, --force open my teeth with the knife, pour from eight to tendrops of the liquor containted in the phial down my throat,and I may perhaps revive."

　　"Perhaps!" exclaimed Dantes in grief-stricken tones.

　　"Help! help!" cried the abbe, "I -- I -- die -- I" --

　　So sudden and violent was the fit that the unfortunateprisoner was unable to complete the sentence; a violentconvulsion shook his whole frame, his eyes started fromtheir sockets, his mouth was drawn on one side, his cheeksbecame purple, he struggled, foamed, dashed himself about,and uttered the most dreadful cries, which, however, Dantesprevented from being heard by covering his head with theblanket. The fit lasted two hours; then, more helpless thanan infant, and colder and paler than marble, more crushedand broken than a reed trampled under foot, he fell back,doubled up in one last convulsion, and became as rigid as acorpse.

　　Edmond waited till life seemed extinct in the body of hisfriend, then, taking up the knife, he with difficulty forcedopen the closely fixed jaws, carefully administered theappointed number of drops, and anxiously awaited the result.An hour passed away and the old man gave no sign ofreturning animation. Dantes began to fear he had delayed toolong ere he administered the remedy, and, thrusting hishands into his hair, continued gazing on the lifelessfeatures of his friend. At length a slight color tinged thelivid cheeks, consciousness returned to the dull, openeyeballs, a faint sigh issued from the lips, and thesufferer made a feeble effort to move.

　　"He is saved! he is saved!" cried Dantes in a paroxysm ofdelight.

　　The sick man was not yet able to speak, but he pointed withevident anxiety towards the door. Dantes listened, andplainly distinguished the approaching steps of the jailer.It was therefore near seven o'clock; but Edmond's anxietyhad put all thoughts of time out of his head. The young mansprang to the entrance, darted through it, carefully drawingthe stone over the opening, and hurried to his cell. He hadscarcely done so before the door opened, and the jailer sawthe prisoner seated as usual on the side of his bed. Almostbefore the key had turned in the lock, and before thedeparting steps of the jailer had died away in the longcorridor he had to traverse, Dantes, whose restless anxietyconcerning his friend left him no desire to touch the foodbrought him, hurried back to the abbe's chamber, and raisingthe stone by pressing his head against it, was soon besidethe sick man's couch. Faria had now fully regained hisconsciousness, but he still lay helpless and exhausted.

　　"I did not expect to see you again," said he feebly, toDantes.

　　"And why not?" asked the young man. "Did you fancy yourselfdying?"

　　"No, I had no such idea; but, knowing that all was ready forflight, I thought you might have made your escape." The deepglow of indignation suffused the cheeks of Dantes.

　　"Without you? Did you really think me capable of that?"

　　"At least," said the abbe, "I now see how wrong such anopinion would have been. Alas, alas! I am fearfullyexhausted and debilitated by this attack."

　　"Be of good cheer," replied Dantes; "your strength willreturn." And as he spoke he seated himself near the bedbeside Faria, and took his hands. The abbe shook his head.

　　"The last attack I had," said he, "lasted but half an hour,and after it I was hungry, and got up without help; now Ican move neither my right arm nor leg, and my head seemsuncomfortable, which shows that there has been a suffusionof blood on the brain. The third attack will either carry meoff, or leave me paralyzed for life."

　　"No, no," cried Dantes; "you are mistaken -- you will notdie! And your third attack (if, indeed, you should haveanother) will find you at liberty. We shall save you anothertime, as we have done this, only with a better chance ofsuccess, because we shall be able to command every requisiteassistance."

　　"My good Edmond," answered the abbe, "be not deceived. Theattack which has just passed away, condemns me forever tothe walls of a prison. None can fly from a dungeon whocannot walk."

　　"Well, we will wait, -- a week, a month, two months, if needbe, -- and meanwhile your strength will return. Everythingis in readiness for our flight, and we can select any timewe choose. As soon as you feel able to swim we will go."

　　"I shall never swim again," replied Faria. "This arm isparalyzed; not for a time, but forever. Lift it, and judgeif I am mistaken." The young man raised the arm, which fellback by its own weight, perfectly inanimate and helpless. Asigh escaped him.

　　"You are convinced now, Edmond, are you not?" asked theabbe. "Depend upon it, I know what I say. Since the firstattack I experienced of this malady, I have continuallyreflected on it. Indeed, I expected it, for it is a familyinheritance; both my father and grandfather died of it in athird attack. The physician who prepared for me the remedy Ihave twice successfully taken, was no other than thecelebrated Cabanis, and he predicted a similar end for me."

　　"The physician may be mistaken!" exclaimed Dantes. "And asfor your poor arm, what difference will that make? I cantake you on my shoulders, and swim for both of us."

　　"My son," said the abbe, "you, who are a sailor and aswimmer, must know as well as I do that a man so loadedwould sink before he had done fifty strokes. Cease, then, toallow yourself to be duped by vain hopes, that even your ownexcellent heart refuses to believe in. Here I shall remaintill the hour of my deliverance arrives, and that, in allhuman probability, will be the hour of my death. As for you,who are young and active, delay not on my account, but fly-- go-I give you back your promise."

　　"It is well," said Dantes. "Then I shall also remain." Then,rising and extending his hand with an air of solemnity overthe old man's head, he slowly added, "By the blood of ChristI swear never to leave you while you live."

　　Faria gazed fondly on his noble-minded, single-hearted,high-principled young friend, and read in his countenanceample confirmation of the sincerity of his devotion and theloyalty of his purpose.

　　"Thanks," murmured the invalid, extending one hand. "Iaccept. You may one of these days reap the reward of yourdisinterested devotion. But as I cannot, and you will not,quit this place, it becomes necessary to fill up theexcavation beneath the soldier's gallery; he might, bychance, hear the hollow sound of his footsteps, and call theattention of his officer to the circumstance. That wouldbring about a discovery which would inevitably lead to ourbeing separated. Go, then, and set about this work, inwhich, unhappily, I can offer you no assistance; keep at itall night, if necessary, and do not return here to-morrowtill after the jailer his visited me. I shall have somethingof the greatest importance to communicate to you."

　　Dantes took the hand of the abbe in his, and affectionatelypressed it. Faria smiled encouragingly on him, and the youngman retired to his task, in the spirit of obedience andrespect which he had sworn to show towards his aged friend.

　　Chapter 18The Treasure.

　　When Dantes returned next morning to the chamber of hiscompanion in captivity, he found Faria seated and lookingcomposed. In the ray of light which entered by the narrowwindow of his cell, he held open in his left hand, of whichalone, it will be recollected, he retained the use, a sheetof paper, which, from being constantly rolled into a smallcompass, had the form of a cylinder, and was not easily keptopen. He did not speak, but showed the paper to Dantes.

　　"What is that?" he inquired.

　　"Look at it," said the abbe with a smile.

　　"I have looked at it with all possible attention," saidDantes, "and I only see a half-burnt paper, on which aretraces of Gothic characters inscribed with a peculiar kindof ink."

　　"This paper, my friend," said Faria, "I may now avow to you,since I have the proof of your fidelity -- this paper is mytreasure, of which, from this day forth, one-half belongs toyou."

　　The sweat started forth on Dantes brow. Until this day andfor how long a time! -- he had refrained from talking of thetreasure, which had brought upon the abbe the accusation ofmadness. With his instinctive delicacy Edmond had preferredavoiding any touch on this painful chord, and Faria had beenequally silent. He had taken the silence of the old man fora return to reason; and now these few words uttered byFaria, after so painful a crisis, seemed to indicate aserious relapse into mental alienation.

　　"Your treasure?" stammered Dantes. Faria smiled.

　　"Yes," said he. "You have, indeed, a noble nature, Edmond,and I see by your paleness and agitation what is passing inyour heart at this moment. No, be assured, I am not mad.This treasure exists, Dantes, and if I have not been allowedto possess it, you will. Yes -- you. No one would listen orbelieve me, because everyone thought me mad; but you, whomust know that I am not, listen to me, and believe me soafterwards if you will."

　　"Alas," murmured Edmond to himself, "this is a terriblerelapse! There was only this blow wanting." Then he saidaloud, "My dear friend, your attack has, perhaps, fatiguedyou; had you not better repose awhile? To-morrow, if youwill, I will hear your narrative; but to-day I wish to nurseyou carefully. Besides," he said, "a treasure is not a thingwe need hurry about."

　　"On the contrary, it is a matter of the utmost importance,Edmond!" replied the old man. "Who knows if to-morrow, orthe next day after, the third attack may not come on? andthen must not all be over? Yes, indeed, I have often thoughtwith a bitter joy that these riches, which would make thewealth of a dozen families, will be forever lost to thosemen who persecute me. This idea was one of vengeance to me,and I tasted it slowly in the night of my dungeon and thedespair of my captivity. But now I have forgiven the worldfor the love of you; now that I see you, young and with apromising future, -- now that I think of all that may resultto you in the good fortune of such a disclosure, I shudderat any delay, and tremble lest I should not assure to one asworthy as yourself the possession of so vast an amount ofhidden wealth." Edmond turned away his head with a sigh.

　　"You persist in your incredulity, Edmond," continued Faria."My words have not convinced you. I see you require proofs.Well, then, read this paper, which I have never shown to anyone."

　　"To-morrow, my dear friend," said Edmond, desirous of notyielding to the old man's madness. "I thought it wasunderstood that we should not talk of that until to-morrow."

　　"Then we will not talk of it until to-morrow; but read thispaper to-day."

　　"I will not irritate him," thought Edmond, and taking thepaper, of which half was wanting, -- having been burnt, nodoubt, by some accident, -- he read: --

　　"This treasure, which may amount to two...of Roman crowns in the most distant a...of the second opening wh...declare to belong to him alo...heir."25th April, l49"

　　"Well!" said Faria, when the young man had finished readingit.

　　"Why," replied Dantes, "I see nothing but broken lines andunconnected words, which are rendered illegible by fire."

　　"Yes, to you, my friend, who read them for the first time;but not for me, who have grown pale over them by manynights' study, and have reconstructed every phrase,completed every thought."

　　"And do you believe you have discovered the hidden meaning?"

　　"I am sure I have, and you shall judge for yourself; butfirst listen to the history of this paper."

　　"Silence!" exclaimed Dantes. "Steps approach -- I go --adieu."

　　And Dantes, happy to escape the history and explanationwhich would be sure to confirm his belief in his friend'smental instability, glided like a snake along the narrowpassage; while Faria, restored by his alarm to a certainamount of activity, pushed the stone into place with hisfoot, and covered it with a mat in order the moreeffectually to avoid discovery.

　　It was the governor, who, hearing of Faria's illness fromthe jailer, had come in person to see him.

　　Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in orderthat he might conceal from the governor the paralysis thathad already half stricken him with death. His fear was lestthe governor, touched with pity, might order him to beremoved to better quarters, and thus separate him from hisyoung companion. But fortunately this was not the case, andthe governor left him, convinced that the poor madman, forwhom in his heart he felt a kind of affection, was onlytroubled with a slight indisposition.

　　During this time, Edmond, seated on his bed with his head inhis hands, tried to collect his scattered thoughts. Faria,since their first acquaintance, had been on all points sorational and logical, so wonderfully sagacious, in fact,that he could not understand how so much wisdom on allpoints could be allied with madness. Was Faria deceived asto his treasure, or was all the world deceived as to Faria?

　　Dantes remained in his cell all day, not daring to return tohis friend, thinking thus to defer the moment when he shouldbe convinced, once for all, that the abbe was mad -- such aconviction would be so terrible!

　　But, towards the evening after the hour for the customaryvisit had gone by, Faria, not seeing the young man appear,tried to move and get over the distance which separatedthem. Edmond shuddered when he heard the painful effortswhich the old man made to drag himself along; his leg wasinert, and he could no longer make use of one arm. Edmondwas obliged to assist him, for otherwise he would not havebeen able to enter by the small aperture which led toDantes' chamber.

　　"Here I am, pursuing you remorselessly," he said with abenignant smile. "You thought to escape my munificence, butit is in vain. Listen to me."

　　Edmond saw there was no escape, and placing the old man onhis bed, he seated himself on the stool beside him.

　　"You know," said the abbe, "that I was the secretary andintimate friend of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princesof that name. I owe to this worthy lord all the happiness Iever knew. He was not rich, although the wealth of hisfamily had passed into a proverb, and I heard the phrasevery often, `As rich as a Spada.' But he, like public rumor,lived on this reputation for wealth; his palace was myparadise. I was tutor to his nephews, who are dead; and whenhe was alone in the world, I tried by absolute devotion tohis will, to make up to him all he had done for me duringten years of unremitting kindness. The cardinal's house hadno secrets for me. I had often seen my noble patronannotating ancient volumes, and eagerly searching amongstdusty family manuscripts. One day when I was reproaching himfor his unavailing searches, and deploring the prostrationof mind that followed them, he looked at me, and, smilingbitterly, opened a volume relating to the History of theCity of Rome. There, in the twentieth chapter of the Life ofPope Alexander VI., were the following lines, which I cannever forget: --

　　"`The great wars of Romagna had ended; Caesar Borgia, whohad completed his conquest, had need of money to purchaseall Italy. The pope had also need of money to bring mattersto an end with Louis XII. King of France, who was formidablestill in spite of his recent reverses; and it was necessary,therefore, to have recourse to some profitable scheme, whichwas a matter of great difficulty in the impoverishedcondition of exhausted Italy. His holiness had an idea. Hedetermined to make two cardinals.'

　　"By choosing two of the greatest personages of Rome,especially rich men -- this was the return the holy fatherlooked for. In the first place, he could sell the greatappointments and splendid offices which the cardinalsalready held; and then he had the two hats to sell besides.There was a third point in view, which will appearhereafter. The pope and Caesar Borgia first found the twofuture cardinals; they were Giovanni Rospigliosi, who heldfour of the highest dignities of the Holy See, and CaesarSpada, one of the noblest and richest of the Roman nobility;both felt the high honor of such a favor from the pope. Theywere ambitious, and Caesar Borgia soon found purchasers fortheir appointments. The result was, that Rospigliosi andSpada paid for being cardinals, and eight other persons paidfor the offices the cardinals held before their elevation,and thus eight hundred thousand crowns entered into thecoffers of the speculators.

　　"It is time now to proceed to the last part of thespeculation. The pope heaped attentions upon Rospigliosi andSpada, conferred upon them the insignia of the cardinalate,and induced them to arrange their affairs and take up theirresidence at Rome. Then the pope and Caesar Borgia invitedthe two cardinals to dinner. This was a matter of disputebetween the holy father and his son. Caesar thought theycould make use of one of the means which he always had readyfor his friends, that is to say, in the first place, thefamous key which was given to certain persons with therequest that they go and open a designated cupboard. Thiskey was furnished with a small iron point, -- a negligenceon the part of the locksmith. When this was pressed toeffect the opening of the cupboard, of which the lock wasdifficult, the person was pricked by this small point, anddied next day. Then there was the ring with the lion's head,which Caesar wore when he wanted to greet his friends with aclasp of the hand. The lion bit the hand thus favored, andat the end of twenty-four hours, the bite was mortal. Caesarproposed to his father, that they should either ask thecardinals to open the cupboard, or shake hands with them;but Alexander VI., replied: `Now as to the worthy cardinals,Spada and Rospigliosi, let us ask both of them to dinner,something tells me that we shall get that money back.Besides, you forget, Caesar, an indigestion declares itselfimmediately, while a prick or a bite occasions a delay of aday or two.' Caesar gave way before such cogent reasoning,and the cardinals were consequently invited to dinner.

　　"The table was laid in a vineyard belonging to the pope,near San Pierdarena, a charming retreat which the cardinalsknew very well by report. Rospigliosi, quite set up with hisnew dignities, went with a good appetite and his mostingratiating manner. Spada, a prudent man, and greatlyattached to his only nephew, a young captain of the highestpromise, took paper and pen, and made his will. He then sentword to his nephew to wait for him near the vineyard; but itappeared the servant did not find him.

　　"Spada knew what these invitations meant; sinceChristianity, so eminently civilizing, had made progress inRome, it was no longer a centurion who came from the tyrantwith a message, `Caesar wills that you die.' but it was alegate a latere, who came with a smile on his lips to sayfrom the pope, `His holiness requests you to dine with him.'

　　"Spada set out about two o'clock to San Pierdarena. The popeawaited him. The first sight that attracted the eyes ofSpada was that of his nephew, in full costume, and CaesarBorgia paying him most marked attentions. Spada turned pale,as Caesar looked at him with an ironical air, which provedthat he had anticipated all, and that the snare was wellspread. They began dinner and Spada was only able to inquireof his nephew if he had received his message. The nephewreplied no; perfectly comprehending the meaning of thequestion. It was too late, for he had already drunk a glassof excellent wine, placed for him expressly by the pope'sbutler. Spada at the same moment saw another bottle approachhim, which he was pressed to taste. An hour afterwards aphysician declared they were both poisoned through eatingmushrooms. Spada died on the threshold of the vineyard; thenephew expired at his own door, making signs which his wifecould not comprehend.

　　"Then Caesar and the pope hastened to lay hands on theheritage, under presence of seeking for the papers of thedead man. But the inheritance consisted in this only, ascrap of paper on which Spada had written: -- `I bequeath tomy beloved nephew my coffers, my books, and, amongst others,my breviary with the gold corners, which I beg he willpreserve in remembrance of his affectionate uncle.'

　　"The heirs sought everywhere, admired the breviary, laidhands on the furniture, and were greatly astonished thatSpada, the rich man, was really the most miserable of uncles-- no treasures -- unless they were those of science,contained in the library and laboratories. That was all.Caesar and his father searched, examined, scrutinized, butfound nothing, or at least very little; not exceeding a fewthousand crowns in plate, and about the same in ready money;but the nephew had time to say to his wife before heexpired: `Look well among my uncle's papers; there is awill.'

　　"They sought even more thoroughly than the august heirs haddone, but it was fruitless. There were two palaces and avineyard behind the Palatine Hill; but in these days landedproperty had not much value, and the two palaces and thevineyard remained to the family since they were beneath therapacity of the pope and his son. Months and years rolledon. Alexander VI. died, poisoned, -- you know by whatmistake. Caesar, poisoned at the same time, escaped byshedding his skin like a snake; but the new skin was spottedby the poison till it looked like a tiger's. Then, compelledto quit Rome, he went and got himself obscurely killed in anight skirmish, scarcely noticed in history. After thepope's death and his son's exile, it was supposed that theSpada family would resume the splendid position they hadheld before the cardinal's time; but this was not the case.The Spadas remained in doubtful ease, a mystery hung overthis dark affair, and the public rumor was, that Caesar, abetter politician than his father, had carried off from thepope the fortune of the two cardinals. I say the two,because Cardinal Rospigliosi, who had not taken anyprecaution, was completely despoiled.

　　"Up to this point," said Faria, interrupting the thread ofhis narrative, "this seems to you very meaningless, nodoubt, eh?"

　　"Oh, my friend," cried Dantes, "on the contrary, it seems asif I were reading a most interesting narrative; go on, I begof you."

　　"I will."

　　"The family began to get accustomed to their obscurity.Years rolled on, and amongst the descendants some weresoldiers, others diplomatists; some churchmen, some bankers;some grew rich, and some were ruined. I come now to the lastof the family, whose secretary I was -- the Count of Spada.I had often heard him complain of the disproportion of hisrank with his fortune; and I advised him to invest all hehad in an annuity. He did so, and thus doubled his income.The celebrated breviary remained in the family, and was inthe count's possession. It had been handed down from fatherto son; for the singular clause of the only will that hadbeen found, had caused it to be regarded as a genuine relic,preserved in the family with superstitious veneration. Itwas an illuminated book, with beautiful Gothic characters,and so weighty with gold, that a servant always carried itbefore the cardinal on days of great solemnity.

　　"At the sight of papers of all sorts, -- titles, contracts,parchments, which were kept in the archives of the family,all descending from the poisoned cardinal, I in my turnexamined the immense bundles of documents, like twentyservitors, stewards, secretaries before me; but in spite ofthe most exhaustive researches, I found -- nothing. Yet Ihad read, I had even written a precise history of the Borgiafamily, for the sole purpose of assuring myself whether anyincrease of fortune had occurred to them on the death of theCardinal Caesar Spada; but could only trace the acquisitionof the property of the Cardinal Rospigliosi, his companionin misfortune.

　　" I was then almost assured that the inheritance had neitherprofited the Borgias nor the family, but had remainedunpossessed like the treasures of the Arabian Nights, whichslept in the bosom of the earth under the eyes of the genie.I searched, ransacked, counted, calculated a thousand and athousand times the income and expenditure of the family forthree hundred years. It was useless. I remained in myignorance, and the Count of Spada in his poverty. My patrondied. He had reserved from his annuity his family papers,his library, composed of five thousand volumes, and hisfamous breviary. All these he bequeathed to me, with athousand Roman crowns, which he had in ready money, oncondition that I would have anniversary masses said for therepose of his soul, and that I would draw up a genealogicaltree and history of his house. All this I did scrupulously.Be easy, my dear Edmond, we are near the conclusion.

　　"In 1807, a month before I was arrested, and a fortnightafter the death of the Count of Spada, on the 25th ofDecember (you will see presently how the date became fixedin my memory), I was reading, for the thousandth time, thepapers I was arranging, for the palace was sold to astranger, and I was going to leave Rome and settle atFlorence, intending to take with me twelve thousand francs Ipossessed, my library, and the famous breviary, when, tiredwith my constant labor at the same thing, and overcome by aheavy dinner I had eaten, my head dropped on my hands, and Ifell asleep about three o'clock in the afternoon. I awoke asthe clock was striking six. I raised my head; I was in utterdarkness. I rang for a light, but as no one came, Idetermined to find one for myself. It was indeed butanticipating the simple manners which I should soon be underthe necessity of adopting. I took a wax-candle in one hand,and with the other groped about for a piece of paper (mymatch-box being empty), with which I proposed to get a lightfrom the small flame still playing on the embers. Fearing,however, to make use of any valuable piece of paper, Ihesitated for a moment, then recollected that I had seen inthe famous breviary, which was on the table beside me, anold paper quite yellow with age, and which had served as amarker for centuries, kept there by the request of theheirs. I felt for it, found it, twisted it up together, andputting it into the expiring flame, set light to it.

　　"But beneath my fingers, as if by magic, in proportion asthe fire ascended, I saw yellowish characters appear on thepaper. I grasped it in my hand, put out the flame as quicklyas I could, lighted my taper in the fire itself, and openedthe crumpled paper with inexpressible emotion, recognizing,when I had done so, that these characters had been traced inmysterious and sympathetic ink, only appearing when exposedto the fire; nearly one-third of the paper had been consumedby the flame. It was that paper you read this morning; readit again, Dantes, and then I will complete for you theincomplete words and unconnected sense."

　　Faria, with an air of triumph, offered the paper to Dantes,who this time read the following words, traced with an inkof a reddish color resembling rust: --

　　"This 25th day of April, 1498, be...Alexander VI., and fearing that not...he may desire to become my heir, and re...and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...my sole heir, that I have bu...and has visited with me, that is, in...Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss...jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone...may amount to nearly two mil...will find on raising the twentieth ro...creek to the east in a right line. Two open...in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...which treasure I bequeath and leave en...as my sole heir."25th April, 1498."Caes...

　　"And now," said the abbe, "read this other paper;" and hepresented to Dantes a second leaf with fragments of lineswritten on it, which Edmond read as follows: --

　　"...ing invited to dine by his Holiness

　　...content with making me pay for my hat,

　　...serves for me the fate of Cardinals Caprara

　　...I declare to my nephew, Guido Spada

　　...ried in a place he knows

　　...the caves of the small

　　...essed of ingots, gold, money,...know of the existence of this treasure, which

　　...lions of Roman crowns, and which he

　　...ck from the small

　　...ings have been made

　　...ngle in the second;

　　...tire to him

　　...ar Spada."

　　Faria followed him with an excited look. "and now," he said,when he saw that Dantes had read the last line, "put the twofragments together, and judge for yourself." Dantes obeyed,and the conjointed pieces gave the following: --

　　"This 25th day of April, 1498, be...ing invited to dine byhis Holiness Alexander VI., and fearing that not...contentwith making me pay for my hat, he may desire to become myheir, and re...serves for me the fate of Cardinals Capraraand Bentivoglio, who were poisoned...I declare to my nephew,Guido Spada, my sole heir, that I have bu...ried in a placehe knows and has visited with me, that is, in...the caves ofthe small Island of Monte Cristo all I poss...ssed ofingots, gold, money, jewels, diamonds, gems; that Ialone...know of the existence of this treasure, which mayamount to nearly two mil...lions of Roman crowns, and whichhe will find on raising the twentieth ro...ck from the smallcreek to the east in a right line. Two open...ings have beenmade in these caves; the treasure is in the furthesta...ngle in the second; which treasure I bequeath and leaveen...tire to him as my sole heir."25th April, 1498."Caes...ar Spada."

　　"Well, do you comprehend now?" inquired Faria.

　　"It is the declaration of Cardinal Spada, and the will solong sought for," replied Edmond, still incredulous.

　　"Yes; a thousand times, yes!"

　　"And who completed it as it now is?"

　　"I did. Aided by the remaining fragment, I guessed the rest;measuring the length of the lines by those of the paper, anddivining the hidden meaning by means of what was in partrevealed, as we are guided in a cavern by the small ray oflight above us."

　　"And what did you do when you arrived at this conclusion?"

　　"I resolved to set out, and did set out at that veryinstant, carrying with me the beginning of my great work,the unity of the Italian kingdom; but for some time theimperial police (who at this period, quite contrary to whatNapoleon desired so soon as he had a son born to him, wishedfor a partition of provinces) had their eyes on me; and myhasty departure, the cause of which they were unable toguess, having aroused their suspicions, I was arrested atthe very moment I was leaving Piombino.

　　"Now," continued Faria, addressing Dantes with an almostpaternal expression, "now, my dear fellow, you know as muchas I do myself. If we ever escape together, half thistreasure is yours; if I die here, and you escape alone, thewhole belongs to you."

　　"But," inquired Dantes hesitating, "has this treasure nomore legitimate possessor in the world than ourselves?"

　　"No, no, be easy on that score; the family is extinct. Thelast Count of Spada, moreover, made me his heir, bequeathingto me this symbolic breviary, he bequeathed to me all itcontained; no, no, make your mind satisfied on that point.If we lay hands on this fortune, we may enjoy it withoutremorse."

　　"And you say this treasure amounts to" --

　　"Two millions of Roman crowns; nearly thirteen millions ofour money."*

　　* $2,600,000 in 1894.

　　"Impossible!" said Dantes, staggered at the enormous amount.

　　"Impossible? and why?" asked the old man. "The Spada familywas one of the oldest and most powerful families of thefifteenth century; and in those times, when otheropportunities for investment were wanting, suchaccumulations of gold and jewels were by no means rare;there are at this day Roman families perishing of hunger,though possessed of nearly a million in diamonds and jewels,handed down by entail, and which they cannot touch." Edmondthought he was in a dream -- he wavered between incredulityand joy.

　　"I have only kept this secret so long from you," continuedFaria, "that I might test your character, and then surpriseyou. Had we escaped before my attack of catalepsy, I shouldhave conducted you to Monte Cristo; now," he added, with asigh, "it is you who will conduct me thither. Well, Dantes,you do not thank me?"

　　"This treasure belongs to you, my dear friend," repliedDantes, "and to you only. I have no right to it. I am norelation of yours."

　　"You are my son, Dantes," exclaimed the old man. "You arethe child of my captivity. My profession condemns me tocelibacy. God has sent you to me to console, at one and thesame time, the man who could not be a father, and theprisoner who could not get free." And Faria extended the armof which alone the use remained to him to the young man whothrew himself upon his neck and wept.

　　Chapter 19The Third Attack.

　　Now that this treasure, which had so long been the object ofthe abbe's meditations, could insure the future happiness ofhim whom Faria really loved as a son, it had doubled itsvalue in his eyes, and every day he expatiated on theamount, explaining to Dantes all the good which, withthirteen or fourteen millions of francs, a man could do inthese days to his friends; and then Dantes' countenancebecame gloomy, for the oath of vengeance he had takenrecurred to his memory, and he reflected how much ill, inthese times, a man with thirteen or fourteen millions coulddo to his enemies.

　　The abbe did not know the Island of Monte Cristo; but Dantesknew it, and had often passed it, situated twenty-five milesfrom Pianosa, between Corsica and the Island of Elba, andhad once touched there. This island was, always had been,and still is, completely deserted. It is a rock of almostconical form, which looks as though it had been thrust up byvolcanic force from the depth to the surface of the ocean.Dantes drew a plan of the island for Faria, and Faria gaveDantes advice as to the means he should employ to recoverthe treasure. But Dantes was far from being as enthusiasticand confident as the old man. It was past a question nowthat Faria was not a lunatic, and the way in which he hadachieved the discovery, which had given rise to thesuspicion of his madness, increased Edmond's admiration ofhim; but at the same time Dantes could not believe that thedeposit, supposing it had ever existed, still existed; andthough he considered the treasure as by no means chimerical,he yet believed it was no longer there.

　　However, as if fate resolved on depriving the prisoners oftheir last chance, and making them understand that they werecondemned to perpetual imprisonment, a new misfortune befellthem; the gallery on the sea side, which had long been inruins, was rebuilt. They had repaired it completely, andstopped up with vast masses of stone the hole Dantes hadpartly filled in. But for this precaution, which, it will beremembered, the abbe had made to Edmond, the misfortunewould have been still greater, for their attempt to escapewould have been detected, and they would undoubtedly havebeen separated. Thus a new, a stronger, and more inexorablebarrier was interposed to cut off the realization of theirhopes.

　　"You see," said the young man, with an air of sorrowfulresignation, to Faria, "that God deems it right to take fromme any claim to merit for what you call my devotion to you.I have promised to remain forever with you, and now I couldnot break my promise if I would. The treasure will be nomore mine than yours, and neither of us will quit thisprison. But my real treasure is not that, my dear friend,which awaits me beneath the sombre rocks of Monte Cristo, itis your presence, our living together five or six hours aday, in spite of our jailers; it is the rays of intelligenceyou have elicited from my brain, the languages you haveimplanted in my memory, and which have taken root there withall their philological ramifications. These differentsciences that you have made so easy to me by the depth ofthe knowledge you possess of them, and the clearness of theprinciples to which you have reduced them -- this is mytreasure, my beloved friend, and with this you have made merich and happy. Believe me, and take comfort, this is betterfor me than tons of gold and cases of diamonds, even werethey not as problematical as the clouds we see in themorning floating over the sea, which we take for terrafirma, and which evaporate and vanish as we draw near tothem. To have you as long as possible near me, to hear youreloquent speech, -- which embellishes my mind, strengthensmy soul, and makes my whole frame capable of great andterrible things, if I should ever be free, -- so fills mywhole existence, that the despair to which I was just on thepoint of yielding when I knew you, has no longer any holdover me; and this -- this is my fortune -- not chimerical,but actual. I owe you my real good, my present happiness;and all the sovereigns of the earth, even Caesar Borgiahimself, could not deprive me of this."

　　Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these twounfortunates passed together went quickly. Faria, who for solong a time had kept silence as to the treasure, nowperpetually talked of it. As he had prophesied would be thecase, he remained paralyzed in the right arm and the leftleg, and had given up all hope of ever enjoying it himself.But he was continually thinking over some means of escapefor his young companion, and anticipating the pleasure hewould enjoy. For fear the letter might be some day lost orstolen, he compelled Dantes to learn it by heart; and Dantesknew it from the first to the last word. Then he destroyedthe second portion, assured that if the first were seized,no one would be able to discover its real meaning. Wholehours sometimes passed while Faria was giving instructionsto Dantes, -- instructions which were to serve him when hewas at liberty. Then, once free, from the day and hour andmoment when he was so, he could have but one only thought,which was, to gain Monte Cristo by some means, and remainthere alone under some pretext which would arouse nosuspicions; and once there, to endeavor to find thewonderful caverns, and search in the appointed spot, -- theappointed spot, be it remembered, being the farthest anglein the second opening.

　　In the meanwhile the hours passed, if not rapidly, at leasttolerably. Faria, as we have said, without having recoveredthe use of his hand and foot, had regained all the clearnessof his understanding, and had gradually, besides the moralinstructions we have detailed, taught his youthful companionthe patient and sublime duty of a prisoner, who learns tomake something from nothing. They were thus perpetuallyemployed, -- Faria, that he might not see himself grow old;Dantes, for fear of recalling the almost extinct past whichnow only floated in his memory like a distant lightwandering in the night. So life went on for them as it doesfor those who are not victims of misfortune and whoseactivities glide along mechanically and tranquilly beneaththe eye of providence.

　　But beneath this superficial calm there were in the heart ofthe young man, and perhaps in that of the old man, manyrepressed desires, many stifled sighs, which found vent whenFaria was left alone, and when Edmond returned to his cell.One night Edmond awoke suddenly, believing that he heardsome one calling him. He opened his eyes upon utterdarkness. His name, or rather a plaintive voice whichessayed to pronounce his name, reached him. He sat up in bedand a cold sweat broke out upon his brow. Undoubtedly thecall came from Faria's dungeon. "Alas," murmured Edmond;"can it be?"

　　He moved his bed, drew up the stone, rushed into thepassage, and reached the opposite extremity; the secretentrance was open. By the light of the wretched and waveringlamp, of which we have spoken, Dantes saw the old man, pale,but yet erect, clinging to the bedstead. His features werewrithing with those horrible symptoms which he already knew,and which had so seriously alarmed him when he saw them forthe first time.

　　"Alas, my dear friend," said Faria in a resigned tone, "youunderstand, do you not, and I need not attempt to explain toyou?"

　　Edmond uttered a cry of agony, and, quite out of his senses,rushed towards the door, exclaiming, "Help, help!" Faria hadjust sufficient strength to restrain him.

　　"Silence," he said, "or you are lost. We must now only thinkof you, my dear friend, and so act as to render yourcaptivity supportable or your flight possible. It wouldrequire years to do again what I have done here, and theresults would be instantly destroyed if our jailers knew wehad communicated with each other. Besides, be assured, mydear Edmond, the dungeon I am about to leave will not longremain empty; some other unfortunate being will soon take myplace, and to him you will appear like an angel ofsalvation. Perhaps he will be young, strong, and enduring,like yourself, and will aid you in your escape, while I havebeen but a hindrance. You will no longer have half a deadbody tied to you as a drag to all your movements. At lengthprovidence has done something for you; he restores to youmore than he takes away, and it was time I should die."

　　Edmond could only clasp his hands and exclaim, "Oh, myfriend, my friend, speak not thus!" and then resuming allhis presence of mind, which had for a moment staggered underthis blow, and his strength, which had failed at the wordsof the old man, he said, "Oh, I have saved you once, and Iwill save you a second time!" And raising the foot of thebed, he drew out the phial, still a third filled with thered liquor.

　　"See," he exclaimed, "there remains still some of the magicdraught. Quick, quick! tell me what I must do this time; arethere any fresh instructions? Speak, my friend; I listen."

　　"There is not a hope," replied Faria, shaking his head, "butno matter; God wills it that man whom he has created, and inwhose heart he has so profoundly rooted the love of life,should do all in his power to preserve that existence,which, however painful it may be, is yet always so dear."

　　"Oh, yes, yes!" exclaimed Dantes; "and I tell you that Iwill save you yet."

　　"Well, then, try. The cold gains upon me. I feel the bloodflowing towards my brain. These horrible chills, which makemy teeth chatter and seem to dislocate my bones, begin topervade my whole frame; in five minutes the malady willreach its height, and in a quarter of an hour there will benothing left of me but a corpse."

　　"Oh!" exclaimed Dantes, his heart wrung with anguish.

　　"Do as you did before, only do not wait so long, all thesprings of life are now exhausted in me, and death," hecontinued, looking at his paralyzed arm and leg, "has buthalf its work to do. If, after having made me swallow twelvedrops instead of ten, you see that I do not recover, thenpour the rest down my throat. Now lift me on my bed, for Ican no longer support myself."

　　Edmond took the old man in his arms, and laid him on thebed.

　　"And now, my dear friend," said Faria, "sole consolation ofmy wretched existence, -- you whom heaven gave me somewhatlate, but still gave me, a priceless gift, and for which Iam most grateful, -- at the moment of separating from youforever, I wish you all the happiness and all the prosperityyou so well deserve. My son, I bless thee!" The young mancast himself on his knees, leaning his head against the oldman's bed.

　　"Listen, now, to what I say in this my dying moment. Thetreasure of the Spadas exists. God grants me the boon ofvision unrestricted by time or space. I see it in the depthsof the inner cavern. My eyes pierce the inmost recesses ofthe earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so much riches.If you do escape, remember that the poor abbe, whom all theworld called mad, was not so. Hasten to Monte Cristo --avail yourself of the fortune -- for you have indeedsuffered long enough." A violent convulsion attacked the oldman. Dantes raised his head and saw Faria's eyes injectedwith blood. It seemed as if a flow of blood had ascendedfrom the chest to the head.

　　"Adieu, adieu!" murmured the old man, clasping Edmond's handconvulsively -- "adieu!"

　　"Oh, no, -- no, not yet," he cried; "do not forsake me! Oh,succor him! Help -- help -- help!"

　　"Hush -- hush!" murmured the dying man, "that they may notseparate us if you save me!"

　　"You are right. Oh, yes, yes; be assured I shall save you!Besides, although you suffer much, you do not seem to be insuch agony as you were before."

　　"Do not mistake. I suffer less because there is in me lessstrength to endure. At your age we have faith in life; it isthe privilege of youth to believe and hope, but old men seedeath more clearly. Oh, 'tis here -- 'tis here -- 'tis over-- my sight is gone -- my senses fail! Your hand, Dantes!Adieu -- adieu!" And raising himself by a final effort, inwhich he summoned all his faculties, he said, -- "MonteCristo, forget not Monte Cristo!" And he fell back on thebed. The crisis was terrible, and a rigid form with twistedlimbs, swollen eyelids, and lips flecked with bloody foam,lay on the bed of torture, in place of the intellectualbeing who so lately rested there.

　　Dantes took the lamp, placed it on a projecting stone abovethe bed, whence its tremulous light fell with strange andfantastic ray on the distorted countenance and motionless,stiffened body. With steady gaze he awaited confidently themoment for administering the restorative.

　　When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he tookthe knife, pried open the teeth, which offered lessresistance than before, counted one after the other twelvedrops, and watched; the phial contained, perhaps, twice asmuch more. He waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour, halfan hour, -- no change took place. Trembling, his hair erect,his brow bathed with perspiration, he counted the seconds bythe beating of his heart. Then he thought it was time tomake the last trial, and he put the phial to the purple lipsof Faria, and without having occasion to force open hisjaws, which had remained extended, he poured the whole ofthe liquid down his throat.

　　The draught produced a galvanic effect, a violent tremblingpervaded the old man's limbs, his eyes opened until it wasfearful to gaze upon them, he heaved a sigh which resembleda shriek, and then his convulsed body returned gradually toits former immobility, the eyes remaining open.

　　Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half elapsed, andduring this period of anguish, Edmond leaned over hisfriend, his hand applied to his heart, and felt the bodygradually grow cold, and the heart's pulsation become moreand more deep and dull, until at length it stopped; the lastmovement of the heart ceased, the face became livid, theeyes remained open, but the eyeballs were glazed. It was sixo'clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and itsfeeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectuallight of the lamp. Strange shadows passed over thecountenance of the dead man, and at times gave it theappearance of life. While the struggle between day and nightlasted, Dantes still doubted; but as soon as the daylightgained the pre-eminence, he saw that he was alone with acorpse. Then an invincible and extreme terror seized uponhim, and he dared not again press the hand that hung out ofbed, he dared no longer to gaze on those fixed and vacanteyes, which he tried many times to close, but in vain --they opened again as soon as shut. He extinguished the lamp,carefully concealed it, and then went away, closing as wellas he could the entrance to the secret passage by the largestone as he descended.

　　It was time, for the jailer was coming. On this occasion hebegan his rounds at Dantes' cell, and on leaving him he wenton to Faria's dungeon, taking thither breakfast and somelinen. Nothing betokened that the man know anything of whathad occurred. He went on his way.

　　Dantes was then seized with an indescribable desire to knowwhat was going on in the dungeon of his unfortunate friend.He therefore returned by the subterraneous gallery, andarrived in time to hear the exclamations of the turnkey, whocalled out for help. Other turnkeys came, and then was heardthe regular tramp of soldiers. Last of all came thegovernor.

　　Edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved thecorpse, heard the voice of the governor, who asked them tothrow water on the dead man's face; and seeing that, inspite of this application, the prisoner did not recover,they sent for the doctor. The governor then went out, andwords of pity fell on Dantes' listening ears, mingled withbrutal laughter.

　　"Well, well," said one, "the madman has gone to look afterhis treasure. Good journey to him!"

　　"With all his millions, he will not have enough to pay forhis shroud!" said another.

　　"Oh," added a third voice, "the shrouds of the Chateau d'Ifare not dear!"

　　"Perhaps," said one of the previous speakers, "as he was achurchman, they may go to some expense in his behalf."

　　"They may give him the honors of the sack."

　　Edmond did not lose a word, but comprehended very little ofwhat was said. The voices soon ceased, and it seemed to himas if every one had left the cell. Still he dared not toenter, as they might have left some turnkey to watch thedead. He remained, therefore, mute and motionless, hardlyventuring to breathe. At the end of an hour, he heard afaint noise, which increased. It was the governor whoreturned, followed by the doctor and other attendants. Therewas a moment's silence, -- it was evident that the doctorwas examining the dead body. The inquiries soon commenced.

　　The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which theprisoner had succumbed, and declared that he was dead.Questions and answers followed in a nonchalant manner thatmade Dantes indignant, for he felt that all the world shouldhave for the poor abbe a love and respect equal to his own.

　　"I am very sorry for what you tell me," said the governor,replying to the assurance of the doctor, "that the old manis really dead; for he was a quiet, inoffensive prisoner,happy in his folly, and required no watching."

　　"Ah," added the turnkey, "there was no occasion for watchinghim: he would have stayed here fifty years, I'll answer forit, without any attempt to escape."

　　"Still," said the governor, "I believe it will be requisite,notwithstanding your certainty, and not that I doubt yourscience, but in discharge of my official duty, that weshould be perfectly assured that the prisoner is dead."There was a moment of complete silence, during which Dantes,still listening, knew that the doctor was examining thecorpse a second time.

　　"You may make your mind easy," said the doctor; "he is dead.I will answer for that."

　　"You know, sir," said the governor, persisting, "that we arenot content in such cases as this with such a simpleexamination. In spite of all appearances, be so kind,therefore, as to finish your duty by fulfilling theformalities described by law."

　　"Let the irons be heated," said the doctor; "but really itis a useless precaution." This order to heat the irons madeDantes shudder. He heard hasty steps, the creaking of adoor, people going and coming, and some minutes afterwards aturnkey entered, saying, --

　　"Here is the brazier, lighted." There was a moment'ssilence, and then was heard the crackling of burning flesh,of which the peculiar and nauseous smell penetrated evenbehind the wall where Dantes was listening in horror. Theperspiration poured forth upon the young man's brow, and hefelt as if he should faint.

　　"You see, sir, he is really dead," said the doctor; "thisburn in the heel is decisive. The poor fool is cured of hisfolly, and delivered from his captivity."

　　"Wasn't his name Faria?" inquired one of the officers whoaccompanied the governor.

　　"Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was an ancient name. He was,too, very learned, and rational enough on all points whichdid not relate to his treasure; but on that, indeed, he wasintractable."

　　"It is the sort of malady which we call monomania," said thedoctor.

　　"You had never anything to complain of?" said the governorto the jailer who had charge of the abbe.

　　"Never, sir," replied the jailer, "never; on the contrary,he sometimes amused me very much by telling me stories. Oneday, too, when my wife was ill, he gave me a prescriptionwhich cured her."

　　"Ah, ah!" said the doctor, "I did not know that I had arival; but I hope, governor, that you will show him allproper respect."

　　"Yes, yes, make your mind easy, he shall be decentlyinterred in the newest sack we can find. Will that satisfyyou?"

　　"Must this last formality take place in your presence, sir?"inquired a turnkey.

　　"Certainly. But make haste -- I cannot stay here all day."Other footsteps, going and coming, were now heard, and amoment afterwards the noise of rustling canvas reachedDantes' ears, the bed creaked, and the heavy footfall of aman who lifts a weight sounded on the floor; then the bedagain creaked under the weight deposited upon it.

　　"This evening," said the governor.

　　"Will there be any mass?" asked one of the attendants.

　　"That is impossible," replied the governor. "The chaplain ofthe chateau came to me yesterday to beg for leave ofabsence, in order to take a trip to Hyeres for a week. Itold him I would attend to the prisoners in his absence. Ifthe poor abbe had not been in such a hurry, he might havehad his requiem."

　　"Pooh, pooh;" said the doctor, with the impiety usual inpersons of his profession; "he is a churchman. God willrespect his profession, and not give the devil the wickeddelight of sending him a priest." A shout of laughterfollowed this brutal jest. Meanwhile the operation ofputting the body in the sack was going on.

　　"This evening," said the governor, when the task was ended.

　　"At what hour?" inquired a turnkey.

　　"Why, about ten or eleven o'clock."

　　"Shall we watch by the corpse?"

　　"Of what use would it be? Shut the dungeon as if he werealive -- that is all." Then the steps retreated, and thevoices died away in the distance; the noise of the door,with its creaking hinges and bolts ceased, and a silencemore sombre than that of solitude ensued, -- the silence ofdeath, which was all-pervasive, and struck its icy chill tothe very soul of Dantes. Then he raised the flag-stonecautiously with his head, and looked carefully around thechamber. It was empty, and Dantes emerged from the tunnel.

　　Chapter 20The Cemetery of the Chateau D'If.

　　On the bed, at full length, and faintly illuminated by thepale light that came from the window, lay a sack of canvas,and under its rude folds was stretched a long and stiffenedform; it was Faria's last winding-sheet, -- a winding-sheetwhich, as the turnkey said, cost so little. Everything wasin readiness. A barrier had been placed between Dantes andhis old friend. No longer could Edmond look into thosewide-open eyes which had seemed to be penetrating themysteries of death; no longer could he clasp the hand whichhad done so much to make his existence blessed. Faria, thebeneficent and cheerful companion, with whom he wasaccustomed to live so intimately, no longer breathed. Heseated himself on the edge of that terrible bed, and fellinto melancholy and gloomy revery.

　　Alone -- he was alone again -- again condemned to silence --again face to face with nothingness! Alone! -- never againto see the face, never again to hear the voice of the onlyhuman being who united him to earth! Was not Faria's fatethe better, after all -- to solve the problem of life at itssource, even at the risk of horrible suffering? The idea ofsuicide, which his friend had driven away and kept away byhis cheerful presence, now hovered like a phantom over theabbe's dead body.

　　"If I could die," he said, "I should go where he goes, andshould assuredly find him again. But how to die? It is veryeasy," he went on with a smile; "I will remain here, rush onthe first person that opens the door, strangle him, and thenthey will guillotine me." But excessive grief is like astorm at sea, where the frail bark is tossed from the depthsto the top of the wave. Dantes recoiled from the idea of soinfamous a death, and passed suddenly from despair to anardent desire for life and liberty.

　　"Die? oh, no," he exclaimed -- "not die now, after havinglived and suffered so long and so much! Die? yes, had I diedyears ago; but now to die would be, indeed, to give way tothe sarcasm of destiny. No, I want to live; I shall struggleto the very last; I will yet win back the happiness of whichI have been deprived. Before I die I must not forget that Ihave my executioners to punish, and perhaps, too, who knows,some friends to reward. Yet they will forget me here, and Ishall die in my dungeon like Faria." As he said this, hebecame silent and gazed straight before him like oneoverwhelmed with a strange and amazing thought. Suddenly hearose, lifted his hand to his brow as if his brain woregiddy, paced twice or thrice round the dungeon, and thenpaused abruptly by the bed.

　　"Just God!" he muttered, "whence comes this thought? Is itfrom thee? Since none but the dead pass freely from thisdungeon, let me take the place of the dead!" Without givinghimself time to reconsider his decision, and, indeed, thathe might not allow his thoughts to be distracted from hisdesperate resolution, he bent over the appalling shroud,opened it with the knife which Faria had made, drew thecorpse from the sack, and bore it along the tunnel to hisown chamber, laid it on his couch, tied around its head therag he wore at night around his own, covered it with hiscounterpane, once again kissed the ice-cold brow, and triedvainly to close the resisting eyes, which glared horribly,turned the head towards the wall, so that the jailer might,when he brought the evening meal, believe that he wasasleep, as was his frequent custom; entered the tunnelagain, drew the bed against the wall, returned to the othercell, took from the hiding-place the needle and thread,flung off his rags, that they might feel only naked fleshbeneath the coarse canvas, and getting inside the sack,placed himself in the posture in which the dead body hadbeen laid, and sewed up the mouth of the sack from theinside.

　　He would have been discovered by the beating of his heart,if by any mischance the jailers had entered at that moment.Dantes might have waited until the evening visit was over,but he was afraid that the governor would change his mind,and order the dead body to be removed earlier. In that casehis last hope would have been destroyed. Now his plans werefully made, and this is what he intended to do. If while hewas being carried out the grave-diggers should discover thatthey were bearing a live instead of a dead body, Dantes didnot intend to give them time to recognize him, but with asudden cut of the knife, he meant to open the sack from topto bottom, and, profiting by their alarm, escape; if theytried to catch him, he would use his knife to betterpurpose.

　　If they took him to the cemetery and laid him in a grave, hewould allow himself to be covered with earth, and then, asit was night, the grave-diggers could scarcely have turnedtheir backs before he would have worked his way through theyielding soil and escaped. He hoped that the weight of earthwould not be so great that he could not overcome it. If hewas detected in this and the earth proved too heavy, hewould be stifled, and then -- so much the better, all wouldbe over. Dantes had not eaten since the preceding evening,but he had not thought of hunger, nor did he think of itnow. His situation was too precarious to allow him even timeto reflect on any thought but one.

　　The first risk that Dantes ran was, that the jailer, when hebrought him his supper at seven o'clock, might perceive thechange that had been made; fortunately, twenty times atleast, from misanthropy or fatigue, Dantes had received hisjailer in bed, and then the man placed his bread and soup onthe table, and went away without saying a word. This timethe jailer might not be as silent as usual, but speak toDantes, and seeing that he received no reply, go to the bed,and thus discover all.

　　When seven o'clock came, Dantes' agony really began. Hishand placed upon his heart was unable to redress itsthrobbings, while, with the other he wiped the perspirationfrom his temples. From time to time chills ran through hiswhole body, and clutched his heart in a grasp of ice. Thenhe thought he was going to die. Yet the hours passed onwithout any unusual disturbance, and Dantes knew that he hadescaped the first peril. It was a good augury. At length,about the hour the governor had appointed, footsteps wereheard on the stairs. Edmond felt that the moment hadarrived, summoned up all his courage, held his breath, andwould have been happy if at the same time he could haverepressed the throbbing of his veins. The footsteps -- theywere double -- paused at the door -- and Dantes guessed thatthe two grave-diggers had come to seek him -- this idea wassoon converted into certainty, when he heard the noise theymade in putting down the hand-bier. The door opened, and adim light reached Dantes' eyes through the coarse sack thatcovered him; he saw two shadows approach his bed, a thirdremaining at the door with a torch in its hand. The two men,approaching the ends of the bed, took the sack by itsextremities.

　　"He's heavy though for an old and thin man," said one, as heraised the head.

　　"They say every year adds half a pound to the weight of thebones," said another, lifting the feet.

　　"Have you tied the knot?" inquired the first speaker.

　　"What would be the use of carrying so much more weight?" wasthe reply, "I can do that when we get there."

　　"Yes, you're right," replied the companion.

　　"What's the knot for?" thought Dantes.

　　They deposited the supposed corpse on the bier. Edmondstiffened himself in order to play the part of a dead man,and then the party, lighted by the man with the torch, whowent first, ascended the stairs. Suddenly he felt the freshand sharp night air, and Dantes knew that the mistral wasblowing. It was a sensation in which pleasure and pain werestrangely mingled. The bearers went on for twenty paces,then stopped, putting the bier down on the ground. One ofthem went away, and Dantes heard his shoes striking on thepavement.

　　"Where am I?" he asked himself.

　　"Really, he is by no means a light load!" said the otherbearer, sitting on the edge of the hand-barrow. Dantes'first impulse was to escape, but fortunately he did notattempt it.

　　"Give us a light," said the other bearer, "or I shall neverfind what I am looking for." The man with the torchcomplied, although not asked in the most polite terms.

　　"What can he be looking for?" thought Edmond. "The spade,perhaps." An exclamation of satisfaction indicated that thegrave-digger had found the object of his search. "Here it isat last," he said, "not without some trouble though."

　　"Yes," was the answer, "but it has lost nothing by waiting."

　　As he said this, the man came towards Edmond, who heard aheavy metallic substance laid down beside him, and at thesame moment a cord was fastened round his feet with suddenand painful violence.

　　"Well, have you tied the knot?" inquired the grave-digger,who was looking on.

　　"Yes, and pretty tight too, I can tell you," was the answer.

　　"Move on, then." And the bier was lifted once more, and theyproceeded.

　　They advanced fifty paces farther, and then stopped to opena door, then went forward again. The noise of the wavesdashing against the rocks on which the chateau is built,reached Dantes' ear distinctly as they went forward.

　　"Bad weather!" observed one of the bearers; "not a pleasantnight for a dip in the sea."

　　"Why, yes, the abbe runs a chance of being wet," said theother; and then there was a burst of brutal laughter. Dantesdid not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood erect on hishead.

　　"Well, here we are at last," said one of them. "A littlefarther -- a little farther," said the other. "You know verywell that the last was stopped on his way, dashed on therocks, and the governor told us next day that we werecareless fellows."

　　They ascended five or six more steps, and then Dantes feltthat they took him, one by the head and the other by theheels, and swung him to and fro. "One!" said thegrave-diggers, "two! three!" And at the same instant Dantesfelt himself flung into the air like a wounded bird,falling, falling, with a rapidity that made his bloodcurdle. Although drawn downwards by the heavy weight whichhastened his rapid descent, it seemed to him as if the falllasted for a century.

　　At last, with a horrible splash, he darted like an arrowinto the ice-cold water, and as he did so he uttered ashrill cry, stifled in a moment by his immersion beneath thewaves.

　　Dantes had been flung into the sea, and was dragged into itsdepths by a thirty-six pound shot tied to his feet. The seais the cemetery of the Chateau d'If.

　　Chapter 21The Island of Tiboulen.

　　Dantes, although stunned and almost suffocated, hadsufficient presence of mind to hold his breath, and as hisright hand (prepared as he was for every chance) held hisknife open, he rapidly ripped up the sack, extricated hisarm, and then his body; but in spite of all his efforts tofree himself from the shot, he felt it dragging him downstill lower. He then bent his body, and by a desperateeffort severed the cord that bound his legs, at the momentwhen it seemed as if he were actually strangled. With amighty leap he rose to the surface of the sea, while theshot dragged down to the depths the sack that had so nearlybecome his shroud.

　　Dantes waited only to get breath, and then dived, in orderto avoid being seen. When he arose a second time, he wasfifty paces from where he had first sunk. He saw overhead ablack and tempestuous sky, across which the wind was drivingclouds that occasionally suffered a twinkling star toappear; before him was the vast expanse of waters, sombreand terrible, whose waves foamed and roared as if before theapproach of a storm. Behind him, blacker than the sea,blacker than the sky, rose phantom-like the vast stonestructure, whose projecting crags seemed like arms extendedto seize their prey, and on the highest rock was a torchlighting two figures. He fancied that these two forms werelooking at the sea; doubtless these strange grave-diggershad heard his cry. Dantes dived again, and remained a longtime beneath the water. This was an easy feat to him, for heusually attracted a crowd of spectators in the bay beforethe lighthouse at Marseilles when he swam there, and wasunanimously declared to be the best swimmer in the port.When he came up again the light had disappeared.

　　He must now get his bearings. Ratonneau and Pomegue are thenearest islands of all those that surround the Chateau d'If,but Ratonneau and Pomegue are inhabited, as is also theislet of Daume, Tiboulen and Lemaire were therefore thesafest for Dantes' venture. The islands of Tiboulen andLemaire are a league from the Chateau d'If; Dantes,nevertheless, determined to make for them. But how could hefind his way in the darkness of the night? At this moment hesaw the light of Planier, gleaming in front of him like astar. By leaving this light on the right, he kept the Islandof Tiboulen a little on the left; by turning to the left,therefore, he would find it. But, as we have said, it was atleast a league from the Chateau d'If to this island. Oftenin prison Faria had said to him, when he saw him idle andinactive, "Dantes, you must not give way to thislistlessness; you will be drowned if you seek to escape, andyour strength has not been properly exercised and preparedfor exertion." These words rang in Dantes' ears, evenbeneath the waves; he hastened to cleave his way throughthem to see if he had not lost his strength. He found withpleasure that his captivity had taken away nothing of hispower, and that he was still master of that element on whosebosom he had so often sported as a boy.

　　Fear, that relentless pursuer, clogged Dantes' efforts. Helistened for any sound that might be audible, and every timethat he rose to the top of a wave he scanned the horizon,and strove to penetrate the darkness. He fancied that everywave behind him was a pursuing boat, and he redoubled hisexertions, increasing rapidly his distance from the chateau,but exhausting his strength. He swam on still, and alreadythe terrible chateau had disappeared in the darkness. Hecould not see it, but he felt its presence. An hour passed,during which Dantes, excited by the feeling of freedom,continued to cleave the waves. "Let us see," said he, "Ihave swum above an hour, but as the wind is against me, thathas retarded my speed; however, if I am not mistaken, I mustbe close to Tiboulen. But what if I were mistaken?" Ashudder passed over him. He sought to tread water, in orderto rest himself; but the sea was too violent, and he feltthat he could not make use of this means of recuperation.

　　"Well," said he, "I will swim on until I am worn out, or thecramp seizes me, and then I shall sink;" and he struck outwith the energy of despair.

　　Suddenly the sky seemed to him to become still darker andmore dense, and heavy clouds seemed to sweep down towardshim; at the same time he felt a sharp pain in his knee. Hefancied for a moment that he had been shot, and listened forthe report; but he heard nothing. Then he put out his hand,and encountered an obstacle and with another stroke knewthat he had gained the shore.

　　Before him rose a grotesque mass of rocks, that resemblednothing so much as a vast fire petrified at the moment ofits most fervent combustion. It was the Island of Tiboulen.Dantes rose, advanced a few steps, and, with a ferventprayer of gratitude, stretched himself on the granite. whichseemed to him softer than down. Then, in spite of the windand rain, he fell into the deep, sweet sleep of utterexhaustion. At the expiration of an hour Edmond was awakenedby the roar of thunder. The tempest was let loose andbeating the atmosphere with its mighty wings; from time totime a flash of lightning stretched across the heavens likea fiery serpent, lighting up the clouds that rolled on invast chaotic waves.

　　Dantes had not been deceived -- he had reached the first ofthe two islands, which was, in fact, Tiboulen. He knew thatit was barren and without shelter; but when the sea becamemore calm, he resolved to plunge into its waves again, andswim to Lemaire, equally arid, but larger, and consequentlybetter adapted for concealment.

　　An overhanging rock offered him a temporary shelter, andscarcely had he availed himself of it when the tempest burstforth in all its fury. Edmond felt the trembling of the rockbeneath which he lay; the waves, dashing themselves againstit, wetted him with their spray. He was safely sheltered,and yet he felt dizzy in the midst of the warring of theelements and the dazzling brightness of the lightning. Itseemed to him that the island trembled to its base, and thatit would, like a vessel at anchor, break moorings, and bearhim off into the centre of the storm. He then recollectedthat he had not eaten or drunk for four-and-twenty hours. Heextended his hands, and drank greedily of the rainwater thathad lodged in a hollow of the rock.

　　As he rose, a flash of lightning, that seemed to rive theremotest heights of heaven, illumined the darkness. By itslight, between the Island of Lemaire and Cape Croiselle, aquarter of a league distant, Dantes saw a fishing-boatdriven rapidly like a spectre before the power of winds andwaves. A second after, he saw it again, approaching withfrightful rapidity. Dantes cried at the top of his voice towarn them of their danger, but they saw it themselves.Another flash showed him four men clinging to the shatteredmast and the rigging, while a fifth clung to the brokenrudder.

　　The men he beheld saw him undoubtedly, for their cries werecarried to his ears by the wind. Above the splintered mast asail rent to tatters was waving; suddenly the ropes thatstill held it gave way, and it disappeared in the darknessof the night like a vast sea-bird. At the same moment aviolent crash was heard, and cries of distress. Dantes fromhis rocky perch saw the shattered vessel, and among thefragments the floating forms of the hapless sailors. Thenall was dark again.

　　Dantes ran down the rocks at the risk of being himselfdashed to pieces; he listened, he groped about, but he heardand saw nothing -- the cries had ceased, and the tempestcontinued to rage. By degrees the wind abated, vast grayclouds rolled towards the west, and the blue firmamentappeared studded with bright stars. Soon a red streak becamevisible in the horizon, the waves whitened, a light playedover them, and gilded their foaming crests with gold. It wasday.

　　Dantes stood mute and motionless before this majesticspectacle, as if he now beheld it for the first time; andindeed since his captivity in the Chateau d'If he hadforgotten that such scenes were ever to be witnessed. Heturned towards the fortress, and looked at both sea andland. The gloomy building rose from the bosom of the oceanwith imposing majesty and seemed to dominate the scene. Itwas about five o'clock. The sea continued to get calmer.

　　"In two or three hours," thought Dantes, "the turnkey willenter my chamber, find the body of my poor friend, recognizeit, seek for me in vain, and give the alarm. Then the tunnelwill be discovered; the men who cast me into the sea and whomust have heard the cry I uttered, will be questioned. Thenboats filled with armed soldiers will pursue the wretchedfugitive. The cannon will warn every one to refuse shelterto a man wandering about naked and famished. The police ofMarseilles will be on the alert by land, whilst the governorpursues me by sea. I am cold, I am hungry. I have lost eventhe knife that saved me. O my God, I have suffered enoughsurely! Have pity on me, and do for me what I am unable todo for myself."

　　As Dantes (his eyes turned in the direction of the Chateaud'If) uttered this prayer, he saw off the farther point ofthe Island of Pomegue a small vessel with lateen sailskimming the sea like a gull in search of prey; and with hissailor's eye he knew it to be a Genoese tartan. She wascoming out of Marseilles harbor, and was standing out to searapidly, her sharp prow cleaving through the waves. "Oh,"cried Edmond, "to think that in half an hour I could joinher, did I not fear being questioned, detected, and conveyedback to Marseilles! What can I do? What story can I invent?under pretext of trading along the coast, these men, who arein reality smugglers, will prefer selling me to doing a goodaction. I must wait. But I cannot ---I am starving. In a fewhours my strength will be utterly exhausted; besides,perhaps I have not been missed at the fortress. I can passas one of the sailors wrecked last night. My story will beaccepted, for there is no one left to contradict me."

　　As he spoke, Dantes looked toward the spot where thefishing-vessel had been wrecked, and started. The red cap ofone of the sailors hung to a point of the rock and sometimbers that had formed part of the vessel's keel, floatedat the foot of the crag. It an instant Dantes' plan wasformed. he swam to the cap, placed it on his head, seizedone of the timbers, and struck out so as to cut across thecourse the vessel was taking.

　　"I am saved!" murmured he. And this conviction restored hisstrength.

　　He soon saw that the vessel, with the wind dead ahead, wastacking between the Chateau d'If and the tower of Planier.For an instant he feared lest, instead of keeping in shore,she should stand out to sea; but he soon saw that she wouldpass, like most vessels bound for Italy, between the islandsof Jaros and Calaseraigne. However, the vessel and theswimmer insensibly neared one another, and in one of itstacks the tartan bore down within a quarter of a mile ofhim. He rose on the waves, making signs of distress; but noone on board saw him, and the vessel stood on another tack.Dantes would have shouted, but he knew that the wind woulddrown his voice.

　　It was then he rejoiced at his precaution in taking thetimber, for without it he would have been unable, perhaps,to reach the vessel -- certainly to return to shore, shouldhe be unsuccessful in attracting attention.

　　Dantes, though almost sure as to what course the vesselwould take, had yet watched it anxiously until it tacked andstood towards him. Then he advanced; but before they couldmeet, the vessel again changed her course. By a violenteffort he rose half out of the water, waving his cap, anduttering a loud shout peculiar to sailers. This time he wasboth seen and heard, and the tartan instantly steeredtowards him. At the same time, he saw they were about tolower the boat.

　　An instant after, the boat, rowed by two men, advancedrapidly towards him. Dantes let go of the timber, which henow thought to be useless, and swam vigorously to meet them.But he had reckoned too much upon his strength, and then herealized how serviceable the timber had been to him. Hisarms became stiff, his legs lost their flexibility, and hewas almost breathless.

　　He shouted again. The two sailors redoubled their efforts,and one of them cried in Italian, "Courage!"

　　The word reached his ear as a wave which he no longer hadthe strength to surmount passed over his head. He rose againto the surface, struggled with the last desperate effort ofa drowning man, uttered a third cry, and felt himselfsinking, as if the fatal cannon shot were again tied to hisfeet. The water passed over his head, and the sky turnedgray. A convulsive movement again brought him to thesurface. He felt himself seized by the hair, then he saw andheard nothing. He had fainted.

　　When he opened his eyes Dantes found himself on the deck ofthe tartan. His first care was to see what course they weretaking. They were rapidly leaving the Chateau d'If behind.Dantes was so exhausted that the exclamation of joy heuttered was mistaken for a sigh.

　　As we have said, he was lying on the deck. A sailor wasrubbing his limbs with a woollen cloth; another, whom herecognized as the one who had cried out "Courage!" held agourd full of rum to his mouth; while the third, an oldsailer, at once the pilot and captain, looked on with thategotistical pity men feel for a misfortune that they haveescaped yesterday, and which may overtake them to-morrow.

　　A few drops of the rum restored suspended animation, whilethe friction of his limbs restored their elasticity.

　　"Who are you?" said the pilot in bad French.

　　"I am," replied Dantes, in bad Italian, "a Maltese sailor.We were coming from Syracuse laden with grain. The storm oflast night overtook us at Cape Morgion, and we were wreckedon these rocks."

　　"Where do you come from?"

　　"From these rocks that I had the good luck to cling to whileour captain and the rest of the crew were all lost. I sawyour vessel, and fearful of being left to perish on thedesolate island, I swam off on a piece of wreckage to tryand intercept your course. You have saved my life, and Ithank you," continued Dantes. "I was lost when one of yoursailors caught hold of my hair."

　　"It was I," said a sailor of a frank and manly appearance;"and it was time, for you were sinking."

　　"Yes," returned Dantes, holding out his hand, "I thank youagain."

　　"I almost hesitated, though," replied the sailor; "youlooked more like a brigand than an honest man, with yourbeard six inches, and your hair a foot long." Dantesrecollected that his hair and beard had not been cut all thetime he was at the Chateau d'If.

　　"Yes," said he, "I made a vow, to our Lady of the Grotto notto cut my hair or beard for ten years if I were saved in amoment of danger; but to-day the vow expires."

　　"Now what are we to do with you?" said the captain.

　　"Alas, anything you please. My captain is dead; I havebarely escaped; but I am a good sailor. Leave me at thefirst port you make; I shall be sure to find employment."

　　"Do you know the Mediterranean?"

　　"I have sailed over it since my childhood."

　　"You know the best harbors?"

　　"There are few ports that I could not enter or leave with abandage over my eyes."

　　"I say, captain," said the sailor who had cried "Courage!"to Dantes, "if what he says is true, what hinders hisstaying with us?"

　　"If he says true," said the captain doubtingly. "But in hispresent condition he will promise anything, and take hischance of keeping it afterwards."

　　"I will do more than I promise," said Dantes.

　　"We shall see," returned the other, smiling.

　　"Where are you going?" asked Dantes.

　　"To Leghorn."

　　"Then why, instead of tacking so frequently, do you not sailnearer the wind?"

　　"Because we should run straight on to the Island of Rion."

　　"You shall pass it by twenty fathoms."

　　"Take the helm, and let us see what you know." The young mantook the helm, felt to see if the vessel answered the rudderpromptly and seeing that, without being a first-rate sailer,she yet was tolerably obedient, --

　　"To the sheets," said he. The four seamen, who composed thecrew, obeyed, while the pilot looked on. "Haul taut." --They obeyed.

　　"Belay." This order was also executed; and the vesselpassed, as Dantes had predicted, twenty fathoms to windward.

　　"Bravo!" said the captain.

　　"Bravo!" repeated the sailors. And they all looked withastonishment at this man whose eye now disclosed anintelligence and his body a vigor they had not thought himcapable of showing.

　　"You see," said Dantes, quitting the helm, "I shall be ofsome use to you, at least during the voyage. If you do notwant me at Leghorn, you can leave me there, and I will payyou out of the first wages I get, for my food and theclothes you lend me."

　　"Ah," said the captain, "we can agree very well, if you arereasonable."

　　"Give me what you give the others, and it will be allright," returned Dantes.

　　"That's not fair," said the seaman who had saved Dantes;"for you know more than we do."

　　"What is that to you, Jacopo?" returned the Captain. "Everyone is free to ask what he pleases."

　　"That's true," replied Jacopo; "I only make a remark."

　　"Well, you would do much better to find him a jacket and apair of trousers, if you have them."

　　"No," said Jacopo; "but I have a shirt and a pair oftrousers."

　　"That is all I want," interrupted Dantes. Jacopo dived intothe hold and soon returned with what Edmond wanted.

　　"Now, then, do you wish for anything else?" said the patron.

　　"A piece of bread and another glass of the capital rum Itasted, for I have not eaten or drunk for a long time." Hehad not tasted food for forty hours. A piece of bread wasbrought, and Jacopo offered him the gourd.

　　"Larboard your helm," cried the captain to the steersman.Dantes glanced that way as he lifted the gourd to his mouth;then paused with hand in mid-air.

　　"Hollo! what's the matter at the Chateau d'If?" said thecaptain.

　　A small white cloud, which had attracted Dantes' attention,crowned the summit of the bastion of the Chateau d'If. Atthe same moment the faint report of a gun was heard. Thesailors looked at one another.

　　"What is this?" asked the captain.

　　"A prisoner has escaped from the Chateau d'If, and they arefiring the alarm gun," replied Dantes. The captain glancedat him, but he had lifted the rum to his lips and wasdrinking it with so much composure, that suspicions, if thecaptain had any, died away.

　　"At any rate," murmured he, "if it be, so much the better,for I have made a rare acquisition." Under pretence of beingfatigued, Dantes asked to take the helm; the steersman, gladto be relieved, looked at the captain, and the latter by asign indicated that he might abandon it to his new comrade.Dantes could thus keep his eyes on Marseilles.

　　"What is the day of the month?" asked he of Jacopo, who satdown beside him.

　　"The 28th of February."

　　"In what year?"

　　"In what year -- you ask me in what year?"

　　"Yes," replied the young man, "I ask you in what year!"

　　"You have forgotten then?"

　　"I got such a fright last night," replied Dantes, smiling,"that I have almost lost my memory. I ask you what year isit?"

　　"The year 1829," returned Jacopo. It was fourteen years dayfor day since Dantes' arrest. He was nineteen when heentered the Chateau d'If; he was thirty-three when heescaped. A sorrowful smile passed over his face; he askedhimself what had become of Mercedes, who must believe himdead. Then his eyes lighted up with hatred as he thought ofthe three men who had caused him so long and wretched acaptivity. He renewed against Danglars, Fernand, andVillefort the oath of implacable vengeance he had made inhis dungeon. This oath was no longer a vain menace; for thefastest sailer in the Mediterranean would have been unableto overtake the little tartan, that with every stitch ofcanvas set was flying before the wind to Leghorn.

　　Chapter 22The Smugglers.

　　Dantes had not been a day on board before he had a veryclear idea of the men with whom his lot had been cast.Without having been in the school of the Abbe Faria, theworthy master of The Young Amelia (the name of the Genoesetartan) knew a smattering of all the tongues spoken on theshores of that large lake called the Mediterranean, from theArabic to the Provencal, and this, while it spared himinterpreters, persons always troublesome and frequentlyindiscreet, gave him great facilities of communication,either with the vessels he met at sea, with the small boatssailing along the coast, or with the people without name,country, or occupation, who are always seen on the quays ofseaports, and who live by hidden and mysterious means whichwe must suppose to be a direct gift of providence, as theyhave no visible means of support. It is fair to assume thatDantes was on board a smuggler.

　　At first the captain had received Dantes on board with acertain degree of distrust. He was very well known to thecustoms officers of the coast; and as there was betweenthese worthies and himself a perpetual battle of wits, hehad at first thought that Dantes might be an emissary ofthese industrious guardians of rights and duties, whoperhaps employed this ingenious means of learning some ofthe secrets of his trade. But the skilful manner in whichDantes had handled the lugger had entirely reassured him;and then, when he saw the light plume of smoke floatingabove the bastion of the Chateau d'If, and heard the distantreport, he was instantly struck with the idea that he had onboard his vessel one whose coming and going, like that ofkings, was accompanied with salutes of artillery. This madehim less uneasy, it must be owned, than if the new-comer hadproved to be a customs officer; but this supposition alsodisappeared like the first, when he beheld the perfecttranquillity of his recruit.

　　Edmond thus had the advantage of knowing what the owner was,without the owner knowing who he was; and however the oldsailor and his crew tried to "pump" him, they extractednothing more from him; he gave accurate descriptions ofNaples and Malta, which he knew as well as Marseilles, andheld stoutly to his first story. Thus the Genoese, subtle ashe was, was duped by Edmond, in whose favor his milddemeanor, his nautical skill, and his admirabledissimulation, pleaded. Moreover, it is possible that theGenoese was one of those shrewd persons who know nothing butwhat they should know, and believe nothing but what theyshould believe.

　　In this state of mutual understanding, they reached Leghorn.Here Edmond was to undergo another trial; he was to find outwhether he could recognize himself, as he had not seen hisown face for fourteen years. He had preserved a tolerablygood remembrance of what the youth had been, and was now tofind out what the man had become. His comrades believed thathis vow was fulfilled. As he had twenty times touched atLeghorn, he remembered a barber in St. Ferdinand Street; hewent there to have his beard and hair cut. The barber gazedin amazement at this man with the long, thick and black hairand beard, which gave his head the appearance of one ofTitian's portraits. At this period it was not the fashion towear so large a beard and hair so long; now a barber wouldonly be surprised if a man gifted with such advantagesshould consent voluntarily to deprive himself of them. TheLeghorn barber said nothing and went to work.

　　When the operation was concluded, and Edmond felt that hischin was completely smooth, and his hair reduced to itsusual length, he asked for a hand-glass. He was now, as wehave said, three-and-thirty years of age, and his fourteenyears' imprisonment had produced a great transformation inhis appearance. Dantes had entered the Chateau d'If with theround, open, smiling face of a young and happy man, withwhom the early paths of life have been smooth. and whoanticipates a future corresponding with his past. This wasnow all changed. The oval face was lengthened, his smilingmouth had assumed the firm and marked lines which betokenresolution; his eyebrows were arched beneath a brow furrowedwith thought; his eyes were full of melancholy, and fromtheir depths occasionally sparkled gloomy fires ofmisanthropy and hatred; his complexion, so long kept fromthe sun, had now that pale color which produces, when thefeatures are encircled with black hair, the aristocraticbeauty of the man of the north; the profound learning he hadacquired had besides diffused over his features a refinedintellectual expression; and he had also acquired, beingnaturally of a goodly stature, that vigor which a framepossesses which has so long concentrated all its forcewithin itself.

　　To the elegance of a nervous and slight form had succeededthe solidity of a rounded and muscular figure. As to hisvoice, prayers, sobs, and imprecations had changed it sothat at times it was of a singularly penetrating sweetness,and at others rough and almost hoarse. Moreover, from beingso long in twilight or darkness, his eyes had acquired thefaculty of distinguishing objects in the night, common tothe hyena and the wolf. Edmond smiled when he beheldhimself: it was impossible that his best friend -- if,indeed, he had any friend left -- could recognize him; hecould not recognize himself.

　　The master of The Young Amelia, who was very desirous ofretaining amongst his crew a man of Edmond's value, hadoffered to advance him funds out of his future profits,which Edmond had accepted. His next care on leaving thebarber's who had achieved his first metamorphosis was toenter a shop and buy a complete sailor's suit -- a garb, aswe all know, very simple, and consisting of white trousers,a striped shirt, and a cap. It was in this costume, andbringing back to Jacopo the shirt and trousers he had lenthim, that Edmond reappeared before the captain of thelugger, who had made him tell his story over and over againbefore he could believe him, or recognize in the neat andtrim sailor the man with thick and matted beard, hairtangled with seaweed, and body soaking in seabrine, whom hehad picked up naked and nearly drowned. Attracted by hisprepossessing appearance, he renewed his offers of anengagement to Dantes; but Dantes, who had his own projects,would not agree for a longer time than three months.

　　The Young Amelia had a very active crew, very obedient totheir captain, who lost as little time as possible. He hadscarcely been a week at Leghorn before the hold of hisvessel was filled with printed muslins, contraband cottons,English powder, and tobacco on which the excise hadforgotten to put its mark. The master was to get all thisout of Leghorn free of duties, and land it on the shores ofCorsica, where certain speculators undertook to forward thecargo to France. They sailed; Edmond was again cleaving theazure sea which had been the first horizon of his youth, andwhich he had so often dreamed of in prison. He left Gorgoneon his right and La Pianosa on his left, and went towardsthe country of Paoli and Napoleon. The next morning going ondeck, as he always did at an early hour, the patron foundDantes leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intenseearnestness at a pile of granite rocks, which the rising suntinged with rosy light. It was the Island of Monte Cristo.The Young Amelia left it three-quarters of a league to thelarboard, and kept on for Corsica.

　　Dantes thought, as they passed so closely to the islandwhose name was so interesting to him, that he had only toleap into the sea and in half an hour be at the promisedland. But then what could he do without instruments todiscover his treasure, without arms to defend himself?Besides, what would the sailors say? What would the patronthink? He must wait.

　　Fortunately, Dantes had learned how to wait; he had waitedfourteen years for his liberty, and now he was free he couldwait at least six months or a year for wealth. Would he nothave accepted liberty without riches if it had been offeredto him? Besides, were not those riches chimerical? --offspring of the brain of the poor Abbe Faria, had they notdied with him? It is true, the letter of the Cardinal Spadawas singularly circumstantial, and Dantes repeated it tohimself, from one end to the other, for he had not forgottena word.

　　Evening came, and Edmond saw the island tinged with theshades of twilight, and then disappear in the darkness fromall eyes but his own, for he, with vision accustomed to thegloom of a prison, continued to behold it last of all, forhe remained alone upon deck. The next morn broke off thecoast of Aleria; all day they coasted, and in the eveningsaw fires lighted on land; the position of these was nodoubt a signal for landing, for a ship's lantern was hung upat the mast-head instead of the streamer, and they came towithin a gunshot of the shore. Dantes noticed that thecaptain of The Young Amelia had, as he neared the land,mounted two small culverins, which, without making muchnoise, can throw a four ounce ball a thousand paces or so.

　　But on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, andeverything proceeded with the utmost smoothness andpoliteness. Four shallops came off with very little noisealongside the lugger, which, no doubt, in acknowledgement ofthe compliment, lowered her own shallop into the sea, andthe five boats worked so well that by two o'clock in themorning all the cargo was out of The Young Amelia and onterra firma. The same night, such a man of regularity wasthe patron of The Young Amelia, the profits were divided,and each man had a hundred Tuscan livres, or about eightyfrancs. But the voyage was not ended. They turned thebowsprit towards Sardinia, where they intended to take in acargo, which was to replace what had been discharged. Thesecond operation was as successful as the first, The YoungAmelia was in luck. This new cargo was destined for thecoast of the Duchy of Lucca, and consisted almost entirelyof Havana cigars, sherry, and Malaga wines.

　　There they had a bit of a skirmish in getting rid of theduties; the excise was, in truth, the everlasting enemy ofthe patron of The Young Amelia. A customs officer was laidlow, and two sailors wounded; Dantes was one of the latter,a ball having touched him in the left shoulder. Dantes wasalmost glad of this affray, and almost pleased at beingwounded, for they were rude lessons which taught him withwhat eye he could view danger, and with what endurance hecould bear suffering. He had contemplated danger with asmile, and when wounded had exclaimed with the greatphilosopher, "Pain, thou art not an evil." He had, moreover.looked upon the customs officer wounded to death, and,whether from heat of blood produced by the encounter, or thechill of human sentiment, this sight had made but slightimpression upon him. Dantes was on the way he desired tofollow, and was moving towards the end he wished to achieve;his heart was in a fair way of petrifying in his bosom.Jacopo, seeing him fall, had believed him killed, andrushing towards him raised him up, and then attended to himwith all the kindness of a devoted comrade.

　　This world was not then so good as Doctor Pangloss believedit, neither was it so wicked as Dantes thought it, sincethis man, who had nothing to expect from his comrade but theinheritance of his share of the prize-money, manifested somuch sorrow when he saw him fall. Fortunately, as we havesaid, Edmond was only wounded, and with certain herbsgathered at certain seasons, and sold to the smugglers bythe old Sardinian women, the wound soon closed. Edmond thenresolved to try Jacopo, and offered him in return for hisattention a share of his prize-money, but Jacopo refused itindignantly.

　　As a result of the sympathetic devotion which Jacopo hadfrom the first bestowed on Edmond, the latter was moved to acertain degree of affection. But this sufficed for Jacopo,who instinctively felt that Edmond had a right tosuperiority of position -- a superiority which Edmond hadconcealed from all others. And from this time the kindnesswhich Edmond showed him was enough for the brave seaman.

　　Then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel,gliding on with security over the azure sea, required nocare but the hand of the helmsman, thanks to the favorablewinds that swelled her sails, Edmond, with a chart in hishand, became the instructor of Jacopo, as the poor AbbeFaria had been his tutor. He pointed out to him the bearingsof the coast, explained to him the variations of thecompass, and taught him to read in that vast book openedover our heads which they call heaven, and where God writesin azure with letters of diamonds. And when Jacopo inquiredof him, "What is the use of teaching all these things to apoor sailor like me?" Edmond replied, "Who knows? You mayone day be the captain of a vessel. Your fellow-countryman,Bonaparte, became emperor." We had forgotten to say thatJacopo was a Corsican.

　　Two months and a half elapsed in these trips, and Edmond hadbecome as skilful a coaster as he had been a hardy seaman;he had formed an acquaintance with all the smugglers on thecoast, and learned all the Masonic signs by which these halfpirates recognize each other. He had passed and re-passedhis Island of Monte Cristo twenty times, but not once had hefound an opportunity of landing there. He then formed aresolution. As soon as his engagement with the patron of TheYoung Amelia ended, he would hire a small vessel on his ownaccount -- for in his several voyages he had amassed ahundred piastres -- and under some pretext land at theIsland of Monte Cristo. Then he would be free to make hisresearches, not perhaps entirely at liberty, for he would bedoubtless watched by those who accompanied him. But in thisworld we must risk something. Prison had made Edmondprudent, and he was desirous of running no risk whatever.But in vain did he rack his imagination; fertile as it was,he could not devise any plan for reaching the island withoutcompanionship.

　　Dantes was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when thepatron, who had great confidence in him, and was verydesirous of retaining him in his service, took him by thearm one evening and led him to a tavern on the Via del'Oglio, where the leading smugglers of Leghorn used tocongregate and discuss affairs connected with their trade.Already Dantes had visited this maritime Bourse two or threetimes, and seeing all these hardy free-traders, who suppliedthe whole coast for nearly two hundred leagues in extent, hehad asked himself what power might not that man attain whoshould give the impulse of his will to all these contraryand diverging minds. This time it was a great matter thatwas under discussion, connected with a vessel laden withTurkey carpets, stuffs of the Levant, and cashmeres. It wasnecessary to find some neutral ground on which an exchangecould be made, and then to try and land these goods on thecoast of France. If the venture was successful the profitwould be enormous, there would be a gain of fifty or sixtypiastres each for the crew.

　　The patron of The Young Amelia proposed as a place oflanding the Island of Monte Cristo, which being completelydeserted, and having neither soldiers nor revenue officers,seemed to have been placed in the midst of the ocean sincethe time of the heathen Olympus by Mercury, the god ofmerchants and robbers, classes of mankind which we in moderntimes have separated if not made distinct, but whichantiquity appears to have included in the same category. Atthe mention of Monte Cristo Dantes started with joy; he roseto conceal his emotion, and took a turn around the smokytavern, where all the languages of the known world werejumbled in a lingua franca. When he again joined the twopersons who had been discussing the matter, it had beendecided that they should touch at Monte Cristo and set outon the following night. Edmond, being consulted, was ofopinion that the island afforded every possible security,and that great enterprises to be well done should be donequickly. Nothing then was altered in the plan, and orderswere given to get under weigh next night, and, wind andweather permitting, to make the neutral island by thefollowing day.

　　Chapter 23The Island of Monte Cristo.

　　Thus, at length, by one of the unexpected strokes of fortunewhich sometimes befall those who have for a long time beenthe victims of an evil destiny, Dantes was about to securethe opportunity he wished for, by simple and natural means,and land on the island without incurring any suspicion. Onenight more and he would be on his way.

　　The night was one of feverish distraction, and in itsprogress visions good and evil passed through Dantes' mind.If he closed his eyes, he saw Cardinal Spada's letterwritten on the wall in characters of flame -- if he sleptfor a moment the wildest dreams haunted his brain. Heascended into grottos paved with emeralds, with panels ofrubies, and the roof glowing with diamond stalactites.Pearls fell drop by drop, as subterranean waters filter intheir caves. Edmond, amazed, wonderstruck, filled hispockets with the radiant gems and then returned to daylight,when be discovered that his prizes had all changed intocommon pebbles. He then endeavored to re-enter themarvellous grottos, but they had suddenly receded, and nowthe path became a labyrinth, and then the entrance vanished,and in vain did he tax his memory for the magic andmysterious word which opened the splendid caverns of AliBaba to the Arabian fisherman. All was useless, the treasuredisappeared, and had again reverted to the genii from whomfor a moment he had hoped to carry it off. The day came atlength, and was almost as feverish as the night had been,but it brought reason to the aid of imagination, and Danteswas then enabled to arrange a plan which had hitherto beenvague and unsettled in his brain. Night came, and with itthe preparation for departure, and these preparations servedto conceal Dantes' agitation. He had by degrees assumed suchauthority over his companions that he was almost like acommander on board; and as his orders were always clear,distinct, and easy of execution, his comrades obeyed himwith celerity and pleasure.

　　The old patron did not interfere, for he too had recognizedthe superiority of Dantes over the crew and himself. He sawin the young man his natural successor, and regretted thathe had not a daughter, that he might have bound Edmond tohim by a more secure alliance. At seven o'clock in theevening all was ready, and at ten minutes past seven theydoubled the lighthouse just as the beacon was kindled. Thesea was calm, and, with a fresh breeze from the south-east,they sailed beneath a bright blue sky, in which God alsolighted up in turn his beacon lights, each of which is aworld. Dantes told them that all hands might turn in, and hewould take the helm. When the Maltese (for so they calledDantes) had said this, it was sufficient, and all went totheir bunks contentedly. This frequently happened. Dantes,cast from solitude into the world, frequently experienced animperious desire for solitude; and what solitude is morecomplete, or more poetical, then that of a ship floating inisolation on the sea during the obscurity of the night, inthe silence of immensity, and under the eye of heaven?

　　Now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the nightlighted up by his illusions, and the silence animated by hisanticipations. When the patron awoke, the vessel washurrying on with every sail set, and every sail full withthe breeze. They were making nearly ten knots an hour. TheIsland of Monte Cristo loomed large in the horizon. Edmondresigned the lugger to the master's care, and went and laydown in his hammock; but, in spite of a sleepless night, hecould not close his eyes for a moment. Two hours afterwardshe came on deck, as the boat was about to double the Islandof Elba. They were just abreast of Mareciana, and beyond theflat but verdant Island of La Pianosa. The peak of MonteCristo reddened by the burning sun, was seen against theazure sky. Dantes ordered the helmsman to put down his helm,in order to leave La Pianosa to starboard, as he knew thathe should shorten his course by two or three knots. Aboutfive o'clock in the evening the island was distinct, andeverything on it was plainly perceptible, owing to thatclearness of the atmosphere peculiar to the light which therays of the sun cast at its setting.

　　Edmond gazed very earnestly at the mass of rocks which gaveout all the variety of twilight colors, from the brightestpink to the deepest blue; and from time to time his cheeksflushed, his brow darkened, and a mist passed over his eyes.Never did gamester, whose whole fortune is staked on onecast of the die, experience the anguish which Edmond felt inhis paroxysms of hope. Night came, and at ten o'clock theyanchored. The Young Amelia was first at the rendezvous. Inspite of his usual command over himself, Dantes could notrestrain his impetuosity. He was the first to jump on shore;and had he dared, he would, like Lucius Brutus, have "kissedhis mother earth." It was dark, but at eleven o'clock themoon rose in the midst of the ocean, whose every wave shesilvered, and then, "ascending high," played in floods ofpale light on the rocky hills of this second Pelion.

　　The island was familiar to the crew of The Young Amelia, --it was one of her regular haunts. As to Dantes, he hadpassed it on his voyage to and from the Levant, but nevertouched at it. He questioned Jacopo. "Where shall we passthe night?" he inquired.

　　"Why, on board the tartan," replied the sailor.

　　"Should we not do better in the grottos?"

　　"What grottos?"

　　"Why, the grottos -- caves of the island."

　　"I do not know of any grottos," replied Jacopo. The coldsweat sprang forth on Dantes' brow.

　　"What, are there no grottos at Monte Cristo?" he asked.

　　"None."

　　For a moment Dantes was speechless; then he remembered thatthese caves might have been filled up by some accident, oreven stopped up, for the sake of greater security, byCardinal Spada. The point was, then, to discover the hiddenentrance. It was useless to search at night, and Dantestherefore delayed all investigation until the morning.Besides, a signal made half a league out at sea, and towhich The Young Amelia replied by a similar signal,indicated that the moment for business had come. The boatthat now arrived, assured by the answering signal that allwas well, soon came in sight, white and silent as a phantom,and cast anchor within a cable's length of shore.

　　Then the landing began. Dantes reflected, as he worked, onthe shout of joy which, with a single word, he could evokefrom all these men, if he gave utterance to the oneunchanging thought that pervaded his heart; but, far fromdisclosing this precious secret, he almost feared that hehad already said too much, and by his restlessness andcontinual questions, his minute observations and evidentpre-occupation, aroused suspicions. Fortunately, as regardedthis circumstance at least, his painful past gave to hiscountenance an indelible sadness, and the glimmerings ofgayety seen beneath this cloud were indeed but transitory.

　　No one had the slightest suspicion; and when next day,taking a fowling-piece, powder, and shot, Dantes declaredhis intention to go and kill some of the wild goats thatwere seen springing from rock to rock, his wish wasconstrued into a love of sport, or a desire for solitude.However, Jacopo insisted on following him, and Dantes didnot oppose this, fearing if he did so that he might incurdistrust. Scarcely, however, had they gone a quarter of aleague when, having killed a kid, he begged Jacopo to takeit to his comrades, and request them to cook it, and whenready to let him know by firing a gun. This and some driedfruits and a flask of Monte Pulciano, was the bill of fare.Dantes went on, looking from time to time behind and aroundabout him. Having reached the summit of a rock, he saw, athousand feet beneath him, his companions, whom Jacopo hadrejoined, and who were all busy preparing the repast whichEdmond's skill as a marksman had augmented with a capitaldish.

　　Edmond looked at them for a moment with the sad and gentlesmile of a man superior to his fellows. "In two hours'time," said he, "these persons will depart richer by fiftypiastres each, to go and risk their lives again byendeavoring to gain fifty more; then they will return with afortune of six hundred francs, and waste this treasure insome city with the pride of sultans and the insolence ofnabobs. At this moment hope makes me despise their riches,which seem to me contemptible. Yet perchance to-morrowdeception will so act on me, that I shall, on compulsion,consider such a contemptible possession as the utmosthappiness. Oh, no!" exclaimed Edmond, "that will not be. Thewise, unerring Faria could not be mistaken in this onething. Besides, it were better to die than to continue tolead this low and wretched life." Thus Dantes, who but threemonths before had no desire but liberty had now not libertyenough, and panted for wealth. The cause was not in Dantes,but in providence, who, while limiting the power of man, hasfilled him with boundless desires.

　　Meanwhile, by a cleft between two walls of rock, following apath worn by a torrent, and which, in all human probability,human foot had never before trod, Dantes approached the spotwhere he supposed the grottos must have existed. Keepingalong the shore, and examining the smallest object withserious attention, he thought he could trace, on certainrocks, marks made by the hand of man.

　　Time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossymantle, as it invests all things of the mind withforgetfulness, seemed to have respected these signs, whichapparently had been made with some degree of regularity, andprobably with a definite purpose. Occasionally the markswere hidden under tufts of myrtle, which spread into largebushes laden with blossoms, or beneath parasitical lichen.So Edmond had to separate the branches or brush away themoss to know where the guide-marks were. The sight of marksrenewed Edmond fondest hopes. Might it not have been thecardinal himself who had first traced them, in order thatthey might serve as a guide for his nephew in the event of acatastrophe, which he could not foresee would have been socomplete. This solitary place was precisely suited to therequirements of a man desirous of burying treasure. Only,might not these betraying marks have attracted other eyesthan those for whom they were made? and had the dark andwondrous island indeed faithfully guarded its precioussecret?

　　It seemed, however, to Edmond, who was hidden from hiscomrades by the inequalities of the ground, that at sixtypaces from the harbor the marks ceased; nor did theyterminate at any grotto. A large round rock, placed solidlyon its base, was the only spot to which they seemed to lead.Edmond concluded that perhaps instead of having reached theend of the route he had only explored its beginning, and hetherefore turned round and retraced his steps.

　　Meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got somewater from a spring, spread out the fruit and bread, andcooked the kid. Just at the moment when they were taking thedainty animal from the spit, they saw Edmond springing withthe boldness of a chamois from rock to rock, and they firedthe signal agreed upon. The sportsman instantly changed hisdirection, and ran quickly towards them. But even while theywatched his daring progress, Edmond's foot slipped, and theysaw him stagger on the edge of a rock and disappear. Theyall rushed towards him, for all loved Edmond in spite of hissuperiority; yet Jacopo reached him first.

　　He found Edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost senseless.He had rolled down a declivity of twelve or fifteen feet.They poured a little rum down his throat, and this remedywhich had before been so beneficial to him, produced thesame effect as formerly. Edmond opened his eyes, complainedof great pain in his knee, a feeling of heaviness in hishead, and severe pains in his loins. They wished to carryhim to the shore; but when they touched him, although underJacopo's directions, he declared, with heavy groans, that hecould not bear to be moved.

　　It may be supposed that Dantes did not now think of hisdinner, but he insisted that his comrades, who had not hisreasons for fasting, should have their meal. As for himself,he declared that he had only need of a little rest, and thatwhen they returned he should be easier. The sailors did notrequire much urging. They were hungry, and the smell of theroasted kid was very savory, and your tars are not veryceremonious. An hour afterwards they returned. All thatEdmond had been able to do was to drag himself about a dozenpaces forward to lean against a moss-grown rock.

　　But, instead of growing easier, Dantes' pains appeared toincrease in violence. The old patron, who was obliged tosail in the morning in order to land his cargo on thefrontiers of Piedmont and France, between Nice and Frejus,urged Dantes to try and rise. Edmond made great exertions inorder to comply; but at each effort he fell back, moaningand turning pale.

　　"He has broken his ribs," said the commander, in a lowvoice. "No matter; he is an excellent fellow, and we mustnot leave him. We will try and carry him on board thetartan." Dantes declared, however, that he would rather diewhere he was than undergo the agony which the slightestmovement cost him. "Well," said the patron, "let what mayhappen, it shall never be said that we deserted a goodcomrade like you. We will not go till evening." This verymuch astonished the sailors, although, not one opposed it.The patron was so strict that this was the first time theyhad ever seen him give up an enterprise, or even delay inits execution. Dantes would not allow that any suchinfraction of regular and proper rules should be made in hisfavor. "No, no," he said to the patron, "I was awkward, andit is just that I pay the penalty of my clumsiness. Leave mea small supply of biscuit, a gun, powder, and balls, to killthe kids or defend myself at need, and a pickaxe, that I maybuild a shelter if you delay in coming back for me."

　　"But you'll die of hunger," said the patron.

　　"I would rather do so," was Edmond reply, "than suffer theinexpressible agonies which the slightest movement causesme." The patron turned towards his vessel, which was rollingon the swell in the little harbor, and, with sails partlyset, would be ready for sea when her toilet should becompleted.

　　"What are we to do, Maltese?" asked the captain. "We cannotleave you here so, and yet we cannot stay."

　　"Go, go!" exclaimed Dantes.

　　"We shall be absent at least a week," said the patron, "andthen we must run out of our course to come here and take youup again."

　　"Why," said Dantes, "if in two or three days you hail anyfishing-boat, desire them to come here to me. I will paytwenty-five piastres for my passage back to Leghorn. If youdo not come across one, return for me." The patron shook hishead.

　　"Listen, Captain Baldi; there's one way of settling this,"said Jacopo. "Do you go, and I will stay and take care ofthe wounded man."

　　"And give up your share of the venture," said Edmond, "toremain with me?"

　　"Yes," said Jacopo, "and without any hesitation."

　　"You are a good fellow and a kind-hearted messmate," repliedEdmond, "and heaven will recompense you for your generousintentions; but I do not wish any one to stay with me. A dayor two of rest will set me up, and I hope I shall find amongthe rocks certain herbs most excellent for bruises."

　　A peculiar smile passed over Dantes' lips; he squeezedJacopo's hand warmly, but nothing could shake hisdetermination to remain -- and remain alone. The smugglersleft with Edmond what he had requested and set sail, but notwithout turning about several times, and each time makingsigns of a cordial farewell, to which Edmond replied withhis hand only, as if he could not move the rest of his body.Then, when they had disappeared, he said with a smile, --"'Tis strange that it should be among such men that we findproofs of friendship and devotion." Then he dragged himselfcautiously to the top of a rock, from which he had a fullview of the sea, and thence he saw the tartan complete herpreparations for sailing, weigh anchor, and, balancingherself as gracefully as a water-fowl ere it takes to thewing, set sail. At the end of an hour she was completely outof sight; at least, it was impossible for the wounded man tosee her any longer from the spot where he was. Then Dantesrose more agile and light than the kid among the myrtles andshrubs of these wild rocks, took his gun in one hand, hispickaxe in the other, and hastened towards the rock on whichthe marks he had noted terminated. "And now," he exclaimed,remembering the tale of the Arabian fisherman, which Fariahad related to him, "now, open sesame!"

　　Chapter 24The Secret Cave.

　　The sun had nearly reached the meridian, and his scorchingrays fell full on the rocks, which seemed themselvessensible of the heat. Thousands of grasshoppers, hidden inthe bushes, chirped with a monotonous and dull note; theleaves of the myrtle and olive trees waved and rustled inthe wind. At every step that Edmond took he disturbed thelizards glittering with the hues of the emerald; afar off hesaw the wild goats bounding from crag to crag. In a word,the island was inhabited, yet Edmond felt himself alone,guided by the hand of God. He felt an indescribablesensation somewhat akin to dread -- that dread of thedaylight which even in the desert makes us fear we arewatched and observed. This feeling was so strong that at themoment when Edmond was about to begin his labor, he stopped,laid down his pickaxe, seized his gun, mounted to the summitof the highest rock, and from thence gazed round in everydirection.

　　But it was not upon Corsica, the very houses of which hecould distinguish; or on Sardinia; or on the Island of Elba,with its historical associations; or upon the almostimperceptible line that to the experienced eye of a sailoralone revealed the coast of Genoa the proud, and Leghorn thecommercial, that he gazed. It was at the brigantine that hadleft in the morning, and the tartan that had just set sail,that Edmond fixed his eyes. The first was just disappearingin the straits of Bonifacio; the other, following anopposite direction, was about to round the Island ofCorsica. This sight reassured him. He then looked at theobjects near him. He saw that he was on the highest point ofthe island, -- a statue on this vast pedestal of granite,nothing human appearing in sight, while the blue ocean beatagainst the base of the island, and covered it with a fringeof foam. Then he descended with cautious and slow step, forhe dreaded lest an accident similar to that he had soadroitly feigned should happen in reality.

　　Dantes, as we have said, had traced the marks along therocks, and he had noticed that they led to a small creek.which was hidden like the bath of some ancient nymph. Thiscreek was sufficiently wide at its mouth, and deep in thecentre, to admit of the entrance of a small vessel of thelugger class, which would be perfectly concealed fromobservation.

　　Then following the clew that, in the hands of the AbbeFaria, had been so skilfully used to guide him through theDaedalian labyrinth of probabilities, he thought that theCardinal Spada, anxious not to be watched, had entered thecreek, concealed his little barque, followed the line markedby the notches in the rock, and at the end of it had buriedhis treasure. It was this idea that had brought Dantes backto the circular rock. One thing only perplexed Edmond, anddestroyed his theory. How could this rock, which weighedseveral tons, have been lifted to this spot, without the aidof many men? Suddenly an idea flashed across his mind.Instead of raising it, thought he, they have lowered it. Andhe sprang from the rock in order to inspect the base onwhich it had formerly stood. He soon perceived that a slopehad been formed, and the rock had slid along this until itstopped at the spot it now occupied. A large stone hadserved as a wedge; flints and pebbles had been insertedaround it, so as to conceal the orifice; this species ofmasonry had been covered with earth, and grass and weeds hadgrown there, moss had clung to the stones, myrtle-bushes hadtaken root, and the old rock seemed fixed to the earth.

　　Dantes dug away the earth carefully, and detected, orfancied he detected, the ingenious artifice. He attackedthis wall, cemented by the hand of time, with his pickaxe.After ten minutes' labor the wall gave way, and a hole largeenough to insert the arm was opened. Dantes went and cut thestrongest olive-tree he could find, stripped off itsbranches, inserted it in the hole, and used it as a lever.But the rock was too heavy, and too firmly wedged, to bemoved by any one man, were he Hercules himself. Dantes sawthat he must attack the wedge. But how? He cast his eyesaround, and saw the horn full of powder which his friendJacopo had left him. He smiled; the infernal invention wouldserve him for this purpose. With the aid of his pickaxe,Dantes, after the manner of a labor-saving pioneer, dug amine between the upper rock and the one that supported it,filled it with powder, then made a match by rolling hishandkerchief in saltpetre. He lighted it and retired. Theexplosion soon followed; the upper rock was lifted from itsbase by the terrific force of the powder; the lower one flewinto pieces; thousands of insects escaped from the apertureDantes had previously formed, and a huge snake, like theguardian demon of the treasure, rolled himself along indarkening coils, and disappeared.

　　Dantes approached the upper rock, which now, without anysupport, leaned towards the sea. The intrepidtreasure-seeker walked round it, and, selecting the spotfrom whence it appeared most susceptible to attack, placedhis lever in one of the crevices, and strained every nerveto move the mass. The rock, already shaken by the explosion,tottered on its base. Dantes redoubled his efforts; heseemed like one of the ancient Titans, who uprooted themountains to hurl against the father of the gods. The rockyielded, rolled over, bounded from point to point, andfinally disappeared in the ocean.

　　On the spot it had occupied was a circular space, exposingan iron ring let into a square flag-stone. Dantes uttered acry of joy and surprise; never had a first attempt beencrowned with more perfect success. He would fain havecontinued, but his knees trembled, and his heart beat soviolently, and his sight became so dim, that he was forcedto pause. This feeling lasted but for a moment. Edmondinserted his lever in the ring and exerted all his strength;the flag-stone yielded, and disclosed steps that descendeduntil they were lost in the obscurity of a subterraneousgrotto. Any one else would have rushed on with a cry of joy.Dantes turned pale, hesitated, and reflected. "Come," saidhe to himself, "be a man. I am accustomed to adversity. Imust not be cast down by the discovery that I have beendeceived. What, then, would be the use of all I havesuffered? The heart breaks when, after having been elated byflattering hopes, it sees all its illusions destroyed. Fariahas dreamed this; the Cardinal Spada buried no treasurehere; perhaps he never came here, or if he did, CaesarBorgia, the intrepid adventurer, the stealthy andindefatigable plunderer, has followed him, discovered histraces, pursued them as I have done, raised the stone, anddescending before me, has left me nothing." He remainedmotionless and pensive, his eyes fixed on the gloomyaperture that was open at his feet.

　　"Now that I expect nothing, now that I no longer entertainthe slightest hopes, the end of this adventure becomessimply a matter of curiosity." And he remained againmotionless and thoughtful.

　　"Yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy a place in the variedcareer of that royal bandit. This fabulous event formed buta link in a long chain of marvels. Yes, Borgia has beenhere, a torch in one band, a sword in the other, and withintwenty paces, at the foot of this rock, perhaps two guardskept watch on land and sea, while their master descended, asI am about to descend, dispelling the darkness before hisawe-inspiring progress."

　　"But what was the fate of the guards who thus possessed hissecret?" asked Dantes of himself.

　　"The fate," replied he, smiling, "of those who buriedAlaric."

　　"Yet, had he come," thought Dantes, "he would have found thetreasure, and Borgia, he who compared Italy to an artichoke,which he could devour leaf by leaf, knew too well the valueof time to waste it in replacing this rock. I will go down."

　　Then he descended, a smile on his lips, and murmuring thatlast word of human philosophy, "Perhaps!" But instead of thedarkness, and the thick and mephitic atmosphere he hadexpected to find, Dantes saw a dim and bluish light, which,as well as the air, entered, not merely by the aperture hehad just formed, but by the interstices and crevices of therock which were visible from without, and through which hecould distinguish the blue sky and the waving branches ofthe evergreen oaks, and the tendrils of the creepers thatgrew from the rocks. After having stood a few minutes in thecavern, the atmosphere of which was rather warm than damp,Dantes' eye, habituated as it was to darkness, could pierceeven to the remotest angles of the cavern, which was ofgranite that sparkled like diamonds. "Alas," said Edmond,smiling, "these are the treasures the cardinal has left; andthe good abbe, seeing in a dream these glittering walls, hasindulged in fallacious hopes."

　　But he called to mind the words of the will, which he knewby heart. "In the farthest angle of the second opening,"said the cardinal's will. He had only found the firstgrotto; he had now to seek the second. Dantes continued hissearch. He reflected that this second grotto must penetratedeeper into the island; he examined the stones, and soundedone part of the wall where he fancied the opening existed,masked for precaution's sake. The pickaxe struck for amoment with a dull sound that drew out of Dantes' foreheadlarge drops of perspiration. At last it seemed to him thatone part of the wall gave forth a more hollow and deeperecho; he eagerly advanced, and with the quickness ofperception that no one but a prisoner possesses, saw thatthere, in all probability, the opening must be.

　　However, he, like Caesar Borgia, knew the value of time;and, in order to avoid fruitless toil, he sounded all theother walls with his pickaxe, struck the earth with the buttof his gun, and finding nothing that appeared suspicious,returned to that part of the wall whence issued theconsoling sound he had before heard. He again struck it, andwith greater force. Then a singular thing occurred. As hestruck the wall, pieces of stucco similar to that used inthe ground work of arabesques broke off, and fell to theground in flakes, exposing a large white stone. The apertureof the rock had been closed with stones, then this stuccohad been applied, and painted to imitate granite. Dantesstruck with the sharp end of his pickaxe, which enteredsomeway between the interstices. It was there he must dig.But by some strange play of emotion, in proportion as theproofs that Faria, had not been deceived became stronger, sodid his heart give way, and a feeling of discouragementstole over him. This last proof, instead of giving him freshstrength, deprived him of it; the pickaxe descended, orrather fell; he placed it on the ground, passed his handover his brow, and remounted the stairs, alleging tohimself, as an excuse, a desire to be assured that no onewas watching him, but in reality because he felt that he wasabout to faint. The island was deserted, and the sun seemedto cover it with its fiery glance; afar off, a few smallfishing boats studded the bosom of the blue ocean.

　　Dantes had tasted nothing, but he thought not of hunger atsuch a moment; he hastily swallowed a few drops of rum, andagain entered the cavern. The pickaxe that had seemed soheavy, was now like a feather in his grasp; he seized it,and attacked the wall. After several blows he perceived thatthe stones were not cemented, but had been merely placed oneupon the other, and covered with stucco; he inserted thepoint of his pickaxe, and using the handle as a lever, withjoy soon saw the stone turn as if on hinges, and fall at hisfeet. He had nothing more to do now, but with the iron toothof the pickaxe to draw the stones towards him one by one.The aperture was already sufficiently large for him toenter, but by waiting, he could still cling to hope, andretard the certainty of deception. At last, after renewedhesitation, Dantes entered the second grotto. The secondgrotto was lower and more gloomy than the first; the airthat could only enter by the newly formed opening had themephitic smell Dantes was surprised not to find in the outercavern. He waited in order to allow pure air to displace thefoul atmosphere, and then went on. At the left of theopening was a dark and deep angle. But to Dantes' eye therewas no darkness. He glanced around this second grotto; itwas, like the first, empty.

　　The treasure, if it existed, was buried in this corner. Thetime had at length arrived; two feet of earth removed, andDantes' fate would be decided. He advanced towards theangle, and summoning all his resolution, attacked the groundwith the pickaxe. At the fifth or sixth blow the pickaxestruck against an iron substance. Never did funeral knell,never did alarm-bell, produce a greater effect on thehearer. Had Dantes found nothing he could not have becomemore ghastly pale. He again struck his pickaxe into theearth, and encountered the same resistance, but not the samesound. "It is a casket of wood bound with iron," thought he.At this moment a shadow passed rapidly before the opening;Dantes seized his gun, sprang through the opening, andmounted the stair. A wild goat had passed before the mouthof the cave, and was feeding at a little distance. Thiswould have been a favorable occasion to secure his dinner;but Dantes feared lest the report of his gun should attractattention.

　　He thought a moment, cut a branch of a resinous tree,lighted it at the fire at which the smugglers had preparedtheir breakfast, and descended with this torch. He wished tosee everything. He approached the hole he had dug. and now,with the aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had inreality struck against iron and wood. He planted his torchin the ground and resumed his labor. In an instant a spacethree feet long by two feet broad was cleared, and Dantescould see an oaken coffer, bound with cut steel; in themiddle of the lid he saw engraved on a silver plate, whichwas still untarnished, the arms of the Spada family -- viz.,a sword, pale, on an oval shield, like all the Italianarmorial bearings, and surmounted by a cardinal's hat;Dantes easily recognized them, Faria had so often drawn themfor him. There was no longer any doubt: the treasure wasthere -- no one would have been at such pains to conceal anempty casket. In an instant he had cleared every obstacleaway, and he saw successively the lock, placed between twopadlocks, and the two handles at each end, all carved asthings were carved at that epoch, when art rendered thecommonest metals precious. Dantes seized the handles, andstrove to lift the coffer; it was impossible. He sought toopen it; lock and padlock were fastened; these faithfulguardians seemed unwilling to surrender their trust. Dantesinserted the sharp end of the pickaxe between the coffer andthe lid, and pressing with all his force on the handle,burst open the fastenings. The hinges yielded in their turnand fell, still holding in their grasp fragments of thewood, and the chest was open.

　　Edmond was seized with vertigo; he cocked his gun and laidit beside him. He then closed his eyes as children do inorder that they may see in the resplendent night of theirown imagination more stars than are visible in thefirmament; then he re-opened them, and stood motionless withamazement. Three compartments divided the coffer. In thefirst, blazed piles of golden coin; in the second, wereranged bars of unpolished gold, which possessed nothingattractive save their value; in the third, Edmond graspedhandfuls of diamonds, pearls, and rubies, which, as theyfell on one another, sounded like hail against glass. Afterhaving touched, felt, examined these treasures, Edmondrushed through the caverns like a man seized with frenzy; heleaped on a rock, from whence he could behold the sea. Hewas alone -- alone with these countless, these unheard-oftreasures! was he awake, or was it but a dream?

　　He would fain have gazed upon his gold, and yet he had notstrength enough; for an instant he leaned his head in hishands as if to prevent his senses from leaving him, and thenrushed madly about the rocks of Monte Cristo, terrifying thewild goats and scaring the sea-fowls with his wild cries andgestures; then he returned, and, still unable to believe theevidence of his senses, rushed into the grotto, and foundhimself before this mine of gold and jewels. This time hefell on his knees, and, clasping his hands convulsively,uttered a prayer intelligible to God alone. He soon becamecalmer and more happy, for only now did he begin to realizehis felicity. He then set himself to work to count hisfortune. There were a thousand ingots of gold, each weighingfrom two to three pounds; then he piled up twenty-fivethousand crowns, each worth about eighty francs of ourmoney, and bearing the effigies of Alexander VI. and hispredecessors; and he saw that the complement was not halfempty. And he measured ten double handfuls of pearls,diamonds, and other gems, many of which, mounted by the mostfamous workmen, were valuable beyond their intrinsic worth.Dantes saw the light gradually disappear, and fearing to besurprised in the cavern, left it, his gun in his hand. Apiece of biscuit and a small quantity of rum formed hissupper, and he snatched a few hours' sleep, lying over themouth of the cave.

　　It was a night of joy and terror, such as this man ofstupendous emotions had already experienced twice or thricein his lifetime.

　　Chapter 25The Unknown.

　　Day, for which Dantes had so eagerly and impatiently waitedwith open eyes, again dawned. With the first light Dantesresumed his search. Again he climbed the rocky height he hadascended the previous evening, and strained his view tocatch every peculiarity of the landscape; but it wore thesame wild, barren aspect when seen by the rays of themorning sun which it had done when surveyed by the fadingglimmer of eve. Descending into the grotto, he lifted thestone, filled his pockets with gems, put the box together aswell and securely as he could, sprinkled fresh sand over thespot from which it had been taken, and then carefully troddown the earth to give it everywhere a uniform appearance;then, quitting the grotto, he replaced the stone, heaping onit broken masses of rocks and rough fragments of crumblinggranite, filling the interstices with earth, into which hedeftly inserted rapidly growing plants, such as the wildmyrtle and flowering thorn, then carefully watering thesenew plantations, he scrupulously effaced every trace offootsteps, leaving the approach to the cavern assavage-looking and untrodden as he had found it. This done,he impatiently awaited the return of his companions. To waitat Monte Cristo for the purpose of watching like a dragonover the almost incalculable richs that had thus fallen intohis possession satisfied not the cravings of his heart,which yearned to return to dwell among mankind, and toassume the rank, power, and influence which are alwaysaccorded to wealth -- that first and greatest of all theforces within the grasp of man.

　　On the sixth day, the smugglers returned. From a distanceDantes recognized the rig and handling of The Young Amelia,and dragging himself with affected difficulty towards thelanding-place, he met his companions with an assurance that,although considerably better than when they quitted him, hestill suffered acutely from his late accident. He theninquired how they had fared in their trip. To this questionthe smugglers replied that, although successful in landingtheir cargo in safety, they had scarcely done so when theyreceived intelligence that a guard-ship had just quitted theport of Toulon and was crowding all sail towards them. Thisobliged them to make all the speed they could to evade theenemy, when they could but lament the absence of Dantes,whose superior skill in the management of a vessel wouldhave availed them so materially. In fact, the pursuingvessel had almost overtaken them when, fortunately, nightcame on, and enabled them to double the Cape of Corsica, andso elude all further pursuit. Upon the whole, however, thetrip had been sufficiently successful to satisfy allconcerned; while the crew, and particularly Jacopo,expressed great regrets that Dantes had not been an equalsharer with themselves in the profits, which amounted to noless a sum than fifty piastres each.

　　Edmond preserved the most admirable self-command, notsuffering the faintest indication of a smile to escape himat the enumeration of all the benefits he would have reapedhad he been able to quit the island; but as The Young Ameliahad merely come to Monte Cristo to fetch him away, heembarked that same evening, and proceeded with the captainto Leghorn. Arrived at Leghorn, he repaired to the house ofa Jew, a dealer in precious stones, to whom he disposed offour of his smallest diamonds for five thousand francs each.Dantes half feared that such valuable jewels in the hands ofa poor sailor like himself might excite suspicion; but thecunning purchaser asked no troublesome questions concerninga bargain by which he gained a round profit of at leasteighty per cent.

　　The following day Dantes presented Jacopo with an entirelynew vessel, accompanying the gift by a donation of onehundred piastres, that he might provide himself with asuitable crew and other requisites for his outfit, uponcondition that he would go at once to Marseilles for thepurpose of inquiring after an old man named Louis Dantes,residing in the Allees de Meillan, and also a young womancalled Mercedes, an inhabitant of the Catalan village.Jacopo could scarcely believe his senses at receiving thismagnificent present, which Dantes hastened to account for bysaying that he had merely been a sailor from whim and adesire to spite his family, who did not allow him as muchmoney as he liked to spend; but that on his arrival atLeghorn he had come into possession of a large fortune, lefthim by an uncle, whose sole heir he was. The superioreducation of Dantes gave an air of such extreme probabilityto this statement that it never once occurred to Jacopo todoubt its accuracy. The term for which Edmond had engaged toserve on board The Young Amelia having expired, Dantes tookleave of the captain, who at first tried all his powers ofpersuasion to induce him to remain as one of the crew, buthaving been told the history of the legacy, he ceased toimportune him further. The following morning Jacopo set sailfor Marseilles, with directions from Dantes to join him atthe Island of Monte Cristo.

　　Having seen Jacopo fairly out of the harbor, Dantesproceeded to make his final adieus on board The YoungAmelia, distributing so liberal a gratuity among her crew asto secure for him the good wishes of all, and expressions ofcordial interest in all that concerned him. To the captainhe promised to write when he had made up his mind as to hisfuture plans. Then Dantes departed for Genoa. At the momentof his arrival a small yacht was under trial in the bay;this yacht had been built by order of an Englishman, who,having heard that the Genoese excelled all other buildersalong the shores of the Mediterranean in the construction offast-sailing vessels, was desirous of possessing a specimenof their skill; the price agreed upon between the Englishmanand the Genoese builder was forty thousand francs. Dantes,struck with the beauty and capability of the little vessel,applied to its owner to transfer it to him, offering sixtythousand francs, upon condition that he should be allowed totake immediate possession. The proposal was too advantageousto be refused, the more so as the person for whom the yachtwas intended had gone upon a tour through Switzerland, andwas not expected back in less than three weeks or a month,by which time the builder reckoned upon being able tocomplete another. A bargain was therefore struck. Dantes ledthe owner of the yacht to the dwelling of a Jew; retiredwith the latter for a few minutes to a small back parlor,and upon their return the Jew counted out to the shipbuilderthe sum of sixty thousand francs in bright gold pieces.

　　The delighted builder then offered his services in providinga suitable crew for the little vessel, but this Dantesdeclined with many thanks, saying he was accustomed tocruise about quite alone, and his principal pleasureconsisted in managing his yacht himself; the only thing thebuilder could oblige him in would be to contrive a sort ofsecret closet in the cabin at his bed's head, the closet tocontain three divisions, so constructed as to be concealedfrom all but himself. The builder cheerfully undertook thecommission, and promised to have these secret placescompleted by the next day, Dantes furnishing the dimensionsand plan in accordance with which they were to beconstructed.

　　The following day Dantes sailed with his yacht from Genoa,under the inspection of an immense crowd drawn together bycuriosity to see the rich Spanish nobleman who preferredmanaging his own yacht. But their wonder was soon changed toadmiration at seeing the perfect skill with which Danteshandled the helm. The boat, indeed, seemed to be animatedwith almost human intelligence, so promptly did it obey theslightest touch; and Dantes required but a short trial ofhis beautiful craft to acknowledge that the Genoese had notwithout reason attained their high reputation in the art ofshipbuilding. The spectators followed the little vessel withtheir eyes as long as it remained visible; they then turnedtheir conjectures upon her probable destination. Someinsisted she was making for Corsica, others the Island ofElba; bets were offered to any amount that she was bound forSpain; while Africa was positively reported by many personsas her intended course; but no one thought of Monte Cristo.Yet thither it was that Dantes guided his vessel, and atMonte Cristo he arrived at the close of the second day; hisboat had proved herself a first-class sailer, and had comethe distance from Genoa in thirty-five hours. Dantes hadcarefully noted the general appearance of the shore, and,instead of landing at the usual place, he dropped anchor inthe little creek. The island was utterly deserted, and boreno evidence of having been visited since he went away; histreasure was just as he had left it. Early on the followingmorning he commenced the removal of his riches, and erenightfall the whole of his immense wealth was safelydeposited in the compartments of the secret locker.

　　A week passed by. Dantes employed it in manoeuvring hisyacht round the island, studying it as a skilful horsemanwould the animal he destined for some important service,till at the end of that time he was perfectly conversantwith its good and bad qualities. The former Dantes proposedto augment, the latter to remedy.

　　Upon the eighth day he discerned a small vessel under fullsail approaching Monte Cristo. As it drew near, herecognized it as the boat he had given to Jacopo. Heimmediately signalled it. His signal was returned, and intwo hours afterwards the newcomer lay at anchor beside theyacht. A mournful answer awaited each of Edmond's eagerinquiries as to the information Jacopo had obtained. OldDantes was dead, and Mercedes had disappeared. Danteslistened to these melancholy tidings with outward calmness;but, leaping lightly ashore, he signified his desire to bequite alone. In a couple of hours he returned. Two of themen from Jacopo's boat came on board the yacht to assist innavigating it, and he gave orders that she should be steereddirect to Marseilles. For his father's death he was in somemanner prepared; but he knew not how to account for themysterious disappearance of Mercedes.

　　Without divulging his secret, Dantes could not givesufficiently clear instructions to an agent. There were,besides, other particulars he was desirous of ascertaining,and those were of a nature he alone could investigate in amanner satisfactory to himself. His looking-glass hadassured him, during his stay at Leghorn, that he ran no riskof recognition; moreover, he had now the means of adoptingany disguise he thought proper. One fine morning, then, hisyacht, followed by the little fishing-boat, boldly enteredthe port of Marseilles, and anchored exactly opposite thespot from whence, on the never-to-be-forgotten night of hisdeparture for the Chateau d'If, he had been put on board theboat destined to convey him thither. Still Dantes could notview without a shudder the approach of a gendarme whoaccompanied the officers deputed to demand his bill ofhealth ere the yacht was permitted to hold communicationwith the shore; but with that perfect self-possession he hadacquired during his acquaintance with Faria, Dantes coollypresented an English passport he had obtained from Leghorn,and as this gave him a standing which a French passportwould not have afforded, he was informed that there existedno obstacle to his immediate debarkation.

　　The first person to attract the attention of Dantes, as helanded on the Canebiere, was one of the crew belonging tothe Pharaon. Edmond welcomed the meeting with this fellow --who had been one of his own sailors -- as a sure means oftesting the extent of the change which time had worked inhis own appearance. Going straight towards him, hepropounded a variety of questions on different subjects,carefully watching the man's countenance as he did so; butnot a word or look implied that he had the slightest idea ofever having seen before the person with whom he was thenconversing. Giving the sailor a piece of money in return forhis civility, Dantes proceeded onwards; but ere he had gonemany steps he heard the man loudly calling him to stop.Dantes instantly turned to meet him. "I beg your pardon,sir," said the honest fellow, in almost breathless haste,"but I believe you made a mistake; you intended to give me atwo-franc piece, and see, you gave me a double Napoleon."

　　"Thank you, my good friend. I see that I have made atrifling mistake, as you say; but by way of rewarding yourhonesty I give you another double Napoleon, that you maydrink to my health, and be able to ask your messmates tojoin you."

　　So extreme was the surprise of the sailor, that he wasunable even to thank Edmond, whose receding figure hecontinued to gaze after in speechless astonishment. "Somenabob from India," was his comment.

　　Dantes, meanwhile, went on his way. Each step he trodoppressed his heart with fresh emotion; his first and mostindelible recollections were there; not a tree, not astreet, that he passed but seemed filled with dear andcherished memories. And thus he proceeded onwards till hearrived at the end of the Rue de Noailles, from whence afull view of the Allees de Meillan was obtained. At thisspot, so pregnant with fond and filial remembrances, hisheart beat almost to bursting, his knees tottered under him,a mist floated over his sight, and had he not clung forsupport to one of the trees, he would inevitably have fallento the ground and been crushed beneath the many vehiclescontinually passing there. Recovering himself, however, hewiped the perspiration from his brows, and stopped not againtill he found himself at the door of the house in which hisfather had lived.

　　The nasturtiums and other plants, which his father haddelighted to train before his window, had all disappearedfrom the upper part of the house. Leaning against the tree,he gazed thoughtfully for a time at the upper stories of theshabby little house. Then he advanced to the door, and askedwhether there were any rooms to be let. Though answered inthe negative, he begged so earnestly to be permitted tovisit those on the fifth floor, that, in despite of theoft-repeated assurance of the concierge that they wereoccupied, Dantes succeeded in inducing the man to go up tothe tenants, and ask permission for a gentleman to beallowed to look at them.

　　The tenants of the humble lodging were a young couple whohad been scarcely married a week; and seeing them, Dantessighed heavily. Nothing in the two small chambers formingthe apartments remained as it had been in the time of theelder Dantes; the very paper was different, while thearticles of antiquated furniture with which the rooms hadbeen filled in Edmond's time had all disappeared; the fourwalls alone remained as he had left them. The bed belongingto the present occupants was placed as the former owner ofthe chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in spiteof his efforts to prevent it, the eyes of Edmond weresuffused in tears as he reflected that on that spot the oldman had breathed his last, vainly calling for his son. Theyoung couple gazed with astonishment at the sight of theirvisitor's emotion, and wondered to see the large tearssilently chasing each other down his otherwise stern andimmovable features; but they felt the sacredness of hisgrief, and kindly refrained from questioning him as to itscause, while, with instinctive delicacy, they left him toindulge his sorrow alone. When he withdrew from the scene ofhis painful recollections, they both accompanied himdownstairs, reiterating their hope that he would come againwhenever he pleased, and assuring him that their poordwelling would ever be open to him. As Edmond passed thedoor on the fourth floor, he paused to inquire whetherCaderousse the tailor still dwelt there; but he received,for reply, that the person in question had got intodifficulties, and at the present time kept a small inn onthe route from Bellegarde to Beaucaire.

　　Having obtained the address of the person to whom the housein the Allees de Meillan belonged, Dantes next proceededthither, and, under the name of Lord Wilmore (the name andtitle inscribed on his passport), purchased the smalldwelling for the sum of twenty-five thousand francs, atleast ten thousand more than it was worth; but had its ownerasked half a million, it would unhesitatingly have beengiven. The very same day the occupants of the apartments onthe fifth floor of the house, now become the property ofDantes, were duly informed by the notary who had arrangedthe necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the new landlordgave them their choice of any of the rooms in the house,without the least augmentation of rent, upon condition oftheir giving instant possession of the two small chambersthey at present inhabited.

　　This strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in theneighborhood of the Allees de Meillan, and a multitude oftheories were afloat, none of which was anywhere near thetruth. But what raised public astonishment to a climax, andset all conjecture at defiance, was the knowledge that thesame stranger who had in the morning visited the Allees deMeillan had been seen in the evening walking in the littlevillage of the Catalans, and afterwards observed to enter apoor fisherman's hut, and to pass more than an hour ininquiring after persons who had either been dead or goneaway for more than fifteen or sixteen years. But on thefollowing day the family from whom all these particulars hadbeen asked received a handsome present, consisting of anentirely new fishing-boat, with two seines and a tender. Thedelighted recipients of these munificent gifts would gladlyhave poured out their thanks to their generous benefactor,but they had seen him, upon quitting the hut, merely givesome orders to a sailor, and then springing lightly onhorseback, leave Marseilles by the Porte d'Aix.

　　Chapter 26The Pont du Gard Inn.

　　Such of my readers as have made a pedestrian excursion tothe south of France may perchance have noticed, about midwaybetween the town of Beaucaire and the village of Bellegarde,-- a little nearer to the former than to the latter, -- asmall roadside inn, from the front of which hung, creakingand flapping in the wind, a sheet of tin covered with agrotesque representation of the Pont du Gard. This modernplace of entertainment stood on the left-hand side of thepost road, and backed upon the Rhone. It also boasted ofwhat in Languedoc is styled a garden, consisting of a smallplot of ground, on the side opposite to the main entrancereserved for the reception of guests. A few dingy olives andstunted fig-trees struggled hard for existence, but theirwithered dusty foliage abundantly proved how unequal was theconflict. Between these sickly shrubs grew a scanty supplyof garlic, tomatoes, and eschalots; while, lone andsolitary, like a forgotten sentinel, a tall pine raised itsmelancholy head in one of the corners of this unattractivespot, and displayed its flexible stem and fan-shaped summitdried and cracked by the fierce heat of the sub-tropicalsun.

　　In the surrounding plain, which more resembled a dusty lakethan solid ground, were scattered a few miserable stalks ofwheat, the effect, no doubt, of a curious desire on the partof the agriculturists of the country to see whether such athing as the raising of grain in those parched regions waspracticable. Each stalk served as a perch for a grasshopper,which regaled the passers by through this Egyptian scenewith its strident, monotonous note.

　　For about seven or eight years the little tavern had beenkept by a man and his wife, with two servants, -- achambermaid named Trinette, and a hostler called Pecaud.This small staff was quite equal to all the requirements,for a canal between Beaucaire and Aiguemortes hadrevolutionized transportation by substituting boats for thecart and the stagecoach. And, as though to add to the dailymisery which this prosperous canal inflicted on theunfortunate inn-keeper, whose utter ruin it was fastaccomplishing, it was situated between the Rhone from whichit had its source and the post-road it had depleted, not ahundred steps from the inn, of which we have given a briefbut faithful description.

　　The inn-keeper himself was a man of from forty to fifty-fiveyears of age, tall, strong, and bony, a perfect specimen ofthe natives of those southern latitudes; he had dark,sparkling, and deep-set eyes, hooked nose, and teeth whiteas those of a carnivorous animal; his hair, like his beard,which he wore under his chin, was thick and curly, and inspite of his age but slightly interspersed with a fewsilvery threads. His naturally dark complexion had assumed astill further shade of brown from the habit the unfortunateman had acquired of stationing himself from morning till eveat the threshold of his door, on the lookout for guests whoseldom came, yet there he stood, day after day, exposed tothe meridional rays of a burning sun, with no otherprotection for his head than a red handkerchief twistedaround it, after the manner of the Spanish muleteers. Thisman was our old acquaintance, Gaspard Caderousse. His wife,on the contrary, whose maiden name had been MadeleineRadelle, was pale, meagre, and sickly-looking. Born in theneighborhood of Arles, she had shared in the beauty forwhich its women are proverbial; but that beauty hadgradually withered beneath the devastating influence of theslow fever so prevalent among dwellers by the ponds ofAiguemortes and the marshes of Camargue. She remained nearlyalways in her second-floor chamber, shivering in her chair,or stretched languid and feeble on her bed, while herhusband kept his daily watch at the door -- a duty heperformed with so much the greater willingness, as it savedhim the necessity of listening to the endless plaints andmurmurs of his helpmate, who never saw him without breakingout into bitter invectives against fate; to all of which herhusband would calmly return an unvarying reply, in thesephilosophic words: --

　　"Hush, La Carconte. It is God's pleasure that things shouldbe so."

　　The sobriquet of La Carconte had been bestowed on MadeleineRadelle from the fact that she had been born in a village,so called, situated between Salon and Lambesc; and as acustom existed among the inhabitants of that part of Francewhere Caderousse lived of styling every person by someparticular and distinctive appellation, her husband hadbestowed on her the name of La Carconte in place of hersweet and euphonious name of Madeleine, which, in allprobability, his rude gutteral language would not haveenabled him to pronounce. Still, let it not be supposed thatamid this affected resignation to the will of Providence,the unfortunate inn-keeper did not writhe under the doublemisery of seeing the hateful canal carry off his customersand his profits, and the daily infliction of his peevishpartner's murmurs and lamentations.

　　Like other dwellers in the south, he was a man of soberhabits and moderate desires, but fond of external show,vain, and addicted to display. During the days of hisprosperity, not a festivity took place without himself andwife being among the spectators. He dressed in thepicturesque costume worn upon grand occasions by theinhabitants of the south of France, bearing equalresemblance to the style adopted both by the Catalans andAndalusians; while La Carconte displayed the charmingfashion prevalent among the women of Arles, a mode of attireborrowed equally from Greece and Arabia. But, by degrees,watch-chains, necklaces, parti-colored scarfs, embroideredbodices, velvet vests, elegantly worked stockings, stripedgaiters, and silver buckles for the shoes, all disappeared;and Gaspard Caderousse, unable to appear abroad in hispristine splendor, had given up any further participation inthe pomps and vanities, both for himself and wife, althougha bitter feeling of envious discontent filled his mind asthe sound of mirth and merry music from the joyous revellersreached even the miserable hostelry to which he still clung,more for the shelter than the profit it afforded.

　　Caderousse, then, was, as usual, at his place of observationbefore the door, his eyes glancing listlessly from a pieceof closely shaven grass -- on which some fowls wereindustriously, though fruitlessly, endeavoring to turn upsome grain or insect suited to their palate -- to thedeserted road, which led away to the north and south, whenhe was aroused by the shrill voice of his wife, andgrumbling to himself as he went, he mounted to her chamber,first taking care, however, to set the entrance door wideopen, as an invitation to any chance traveller who might bepassing.

　　At the moment Caderousse quitted his sentry-like watchbefore the door, the road on which he so eagerly strainedhis sight was void and lonely as a desert at mid-day. Thereit lay stretching out into one interminable line of dust andsand, with its sides bordered by tall, meagre trees,altogether presenting so uninviting an appearance, that noone in his senses could have imagined that any traveller, atliberty to regulate his hours for journeying, would chooseto expose himself in such a formidable Sahara. Nevertheless,had Caderousse but retained his post a few minutes longer,he might have caught a dim outline of something approachingfrom the direction of Bellegarde; as the moving object drewnearer, he would easily have perceived that it consisted ofa man and horse, between whom the kindest and most amiableunderstanding appeared to exist. The horse was of Hungarianbreed, and ambled along at an easy pace. His rider was apriest, dressed in black, and wearing a three-cornered hat;and, spite of the ardent rays of a noonday sun, the paircame on with a fair degree of rapidity.

　　Having arrived before the Pont du Gard, the horse stopped,but whether for his own pleasure or that of his rider wouldhave been difficult to say. However that might have been,the priest, dismounting, led his steed by the bridle insearch of some place to which he could secure him. Availinghimself of a handle that projected from a half-fallen door,he tied the animal safely and having drawn a red cottonhandkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspirationthat streamed from his brow, then, advancing to the door,struck thrice with the end of his iron-shod stick. At thisunusual sound, a huge black dog came rushing to meet thedaring assailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode, snarlingand displaying his sharp white teeth with a determinedhostility that abundantly proved how little he wasaccustomed to society. At that moment a heavy footstep washeard descending the wooden staircase that led from theupper floor, and, with many bows and courteous smiles, minehost of the Pont du Gard besought his guest to enter.

　　"You are welcome, sir, most welcome!" repeated theastonished Caderousse. "Now, then, Margotin," cried he,speaking to the dog, "will you be quiet? Pray don't heedhim, sir! -- he only barks, he never bites. I make no doubta glass of good wine would be acceptable this dreadfully hotday." Then perceiving for the first time the garb of thetraveller he had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed:"A thousand pardons! I really did not observe whom I had thehonor to receive under my poor roof. What would the abbeplease to have? What refreshment can I offer? All I have isat his service."

　　The priest gazed on the person addressing him with a longand searching gaze -- there even seemed a disposition on hispart to court a similar scrutiny on the part of theinn-keeper; then, observing in the countenance of the latterno other expression than extreme surprise at his own want ofattention to an inquiry so courteously worded, he deemed itas well to terminate this dumb show, and therefore said,speaking with a strong Italian accent, "You are, I presume,M. Caderousse?"

　　"Yes, sir," answered the host, even more surprised at thequestion than he had been by the silence which had precededit; "I am Gaspard Caderousse, at your service."

　　"Gaspard Caderousse," rejoined the priest. "Yes, --Christian and surname are the same. You formerly lived, Ibelieve in the Allees de Meillan, on the fourth floor?"

　　"I did."

　　"And you followed the business of a tailor?"

　　"True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off. It is so hotat Marseilles, that really I believe that the respectableinhabitants will in time go without any clothing whatever.But talking of heat, is there nothing I can offer you by wayof refreshment?"

　　"Yes; let me have a bottle of your best wine, and then, withyour permission, we will resume our conversation from wherewe left off."

　　"As you please, sir," said Caderousse, who, anxious not tolose the present opportunity of finding a customer for oneof the few bottles of Cahors still remaining in hispossession, hastily raised a trap-door in the floor of theapartment they were in, which served both as parlor andkitchen. Upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat atthe expiration of five minutes, he found the abbe seatedupon a wooden stool, leaning his elbow on a table, whileMargotin, whose animosity seemed appeased by the unusualcommand of the traveller for refreshments, had crept up tohim, and had established himself very comfortably betweenhis knees, his long, skinny neck resting on his lap, whilehis dim eye was fixed earnestly on the traveller's face.

　　"Are you quite alone?" inquired the guest, as Caderousseplaced before him the bottle of wine and a glass.

　　"Quite, quite alone," replied the man -- "or, at least,practically so, for my poor wife, who is the only person inthe house besides myself, is laid up with illness, andunable to render me the least assistance, poor thing!"

　　"You are married, then?" said the priest, with a show ofinterest, glancing round as he spoke at the scantyfurnishings of the apartment.

　　"Ah, sir," said Caderousse with a sigh, "it is easy toperceive I am not a rich man; but in this world a man doesnot thrive the better for being honest." The abbe fixed onhim a searching, penetrating glance.

　　"Yes, honest -- I can certainly say that much for myself,"continued the inn-keeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny ofthe abbe's gaze; "I can boast with truth of being an honestman; and," continued he significantly, with a hand on hisbreast and shaking his head, "that is more than every onecan say nowadays."

　　"So much the better for you, if what you assert be true,"said the abbe; "for I am firmly persuaded that, sooner orlater, the good will be rewarded, and the wicked punished."

　　"Such words as those belong to your profession," answeredCaderousse, "and you do well to repeat them; but," added he,with a bitter expression of countenance, "one is free tobelieve them or not, as one pleases."

　　"You are wrong to speak thus," said the abbe; "and perhaps Imay, in my own person, be able to prove to you howcompletely you are in error."

　　"What mean you?" inquired Caderousse with a look ofsurprise.

　　"In the first place, I must be satisfied that you are theperson I am in search of."

　　"What proofs do you require?"

　　"Did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of a youngsailor named Dantes?"

　　"Dantes? Did I know poor dear Edmond? Why, Edmond Dantes andmyself were intimate friends!" exclaimed Caderousse, whosecountenance flushed darkly as he caught the penetrating gazeof the abbe fixed on him, while the clear, calm eye of thequestioner seemed to dilate with feverish scrutiny.

　　"You remind me," said the priest, "that the young manconcerning whom I asked you was said to bear the name ofEdmond."

　　"Said to bear the name!" repeated Caderousse, becomingexcited and eager. "Why, he was so called as truly as Imyself bore the appellation of Gaspard Caderousse; but tellme, I pray, what has become of poor Edmond? Did you knowhim? Is he alive and at liberty? Is he prosperous andhappy?"

　　"He died a more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisonerthan the felons who pay the penalty of their crimes at thegalleys of Toulon."

　　A deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance ofCaderousse, who turned away, and the priest saw him wipingthe tears from his eyes with the corner of the redhandkerchief twisted round his head.

　　"Poor fellow, poor fellow!" murmured Caderousse. "Well,there, sir, is another proof that good people are neverrewarded on this earth, and that none but the wickedprosper. Ah," continued Caderousse, speaking in the highlycolored language of the south, "the world grows worse andworse. Why does not God, if he really hates the wicked, ashe is said to do, send down brimstone and fire, and consumethem altogether?"

　　"You speak as though you had loved this young Dantes,"observed the abbe, without taking any notice of hiscompanion's vehemence.

　　"And so I did," replied Caderousse; "though once, I confess,I envied him his good fortune. But I swear to you, sir, Iswear to you, by everything a man holds dear, I have, sincethen, deeply and sincerely lamented his unhappy fate." Therewas a brief silence, during which the fixed, searching eyeof the abbe was employed in scrutinizing the agitatedfeatures of the inn-keeper.

　　"You knew the poor lad, then?" continued Caderousse.

　　"I was called to see him on his dying bed, that I mightadminister to him the consolations of religion."

　　"And of what did he die?" asked Caderousse in a chokingvoice.

　　"Of what, think you, do young and strong men die in prison,when they have scarcely numbered their thirtieth year,unless it be of imprisonment?" Caderousse wiped away thelarge beads of perspiration that gathered on his brow.

　　"But the strangest part of the story is," resumed the abbe,"that Dantes, even in his dying moments, swore by hiscrucified Redeemer, that he was utterly ignorant of thecause of his detention."

　　"And so he was," murmured Caderousse. "How should he havebeen otherwise? Ah, sir, the poor fellow told you thetruth."

　　"And for that reason, he besought me to try and clear up amystery he had never been able to penetrate, and to clearhis memory should any foul spot or stain have fallen on it."

　　And here the look of the abbe, becoming more and more fixed,seemed to rest with ill-concealed satisfaction on the gloomydepression which was rapidly spreading over the countenanceof Caderousse.

　　"A rich Englishman," continued the abbe, "who had been hiscompanion in misfortune, but had been released from prisonduring the second restoration, was possessed of a diamond ofimmense value; this jewel he bestowed on Dantes upon himselfquitting the prison, as a mark of his gratitude for thekindness and brotherly care with which Dantes had nursed himin a severe illness he underwent during his confinement.Instead of employing this diamond in attempting to bribe hisjailers, who might only have taken it and then betrayed himto the governor, Dantes carefully preserved it, that in theevent of his getting out of prison he might have wherewithalto live, for the sale of such a diamond would have quitesufficed to make his fortune."

　　"Then, I suppose," asked Caderousse, with eager, glowinglooks, "that it was a stone of immense value?"

　　"Why, everything is relative," answered the abbe. "To one inEdmond's position the diamond certainly was of great value.It was estimated at fifty thousand francs."

　　"Bless me!" exclaimed Caderousse, "fifty thousand francs!Surely the diamond was as large as a nut to be worth allthat."

　　"No," replied the abbe, "it was not of such a size as that;but you shall judge for yourself. I have it with me."

　　The sharp gaze of Caderousse was instantly directed towardsthe priest's garments, as though hoping to discover thelocation of the treasure. Calmly drawing forth from hispocket a small box covered with black shagreen, the abbeopened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes of Caderoussethe sparkling jewel it contained, set in a ring of admirableworkmanship. "And that diamond," cried Caderousse, almostbreathless with eager admiration, "you say, is worth fiftythousand francs?"

　　"It is, without the setting, which is also valuable,"replied the abbe, as he closed the box, and returned it tohis pocket, while its brilliant hues seemed still to dancebefore the eyes of the fascinated inn-keeper.

　　"But how comes the diamond in your possession, sir? DidEdmond make you his heir?"

　　"No, merely his testamentary executor. `I once possessedfour dear and faithful friends, besides the maiden to whom Iwas betrothed' he said; `and I feel convinced they have allunfeignedly grieved over my loss. The name of one of thefour friends is Caderousse.'" The inn-keeper shivered.

　　"`Another of the number,'" continued the abbe, withoutseeming to notice the emotion of Caderousse, "`is calledDanglars; and the third, in spite of being my rival,entertained a very sincere affection for me.'" A fiendishsmile played over the features of Caderousse, who was aboutto break in upon the abbe's speech, when the latter, wavinghis hand, said, "Allow me to finish first, and then if youhave any observations to make, you can do so afterwards.`The third of my friends, although my rival, was muchattached to me, -- his name was Fernand; that of mybetrothed was' -- Stay, stay," continued the abbe, "I haveforgotten what he called her."

　　"Mercedes," said Caderousse eagerly.

　　"True," said the abbe, with a stifled sigh, "Mercedes itwas."

　　"Go on," urged Caderousse.

　　"Bring me a carafe of water," said the abbe.

　　Caderousse quickly performed the stranger's bidding; andafter pouring some into a glass, and slowly swallowing itscontents, the abbe, resuming his usual placidity of manner,said, as he placed his empty glass on the table, -- "Wheredid we leave off?"

　　"The name of Edmond's betrothed was Mercedes."

　　"To be sure. `You will go to Marseilles,' said Dantes, --for you understand, I repeat his words just as he utteredthem. Do you understand?"

　　"Perfectly."

　　"`You will sell this diamond; you will divide the money intofive equal parts, and give an equal portion to these goodfriends, the only persons who have loved me upon earth.'"

　　"But why into five parts?" asked Caderousse; "you onlymentioned four persons."

　　"Because the fifth is dead, as I hear. The fifth sharer inEdmond's bequest, was his own father."

　　"Too true, too true!" ejaculated Caderousse, almostsuffocated by the contending passions which assailed him,"the poor old man did die."

　　"I learned so much at Marseilles," replied the abbe, makinga strong effort to appear indifferent; "but from the lengthof time that has elapsed since the death of the elderDantes, I was unable to obtain any particulars of his end.Can you enlighten me on that point?"

　　"I do not know who could if I could not," said Caderousse."Why, I lived almost on the same floor with the poor oldman. Ah, yes, about a year after the disappearance of hisson the poor old man died."

　　"Of what did he die?"

　　"Why, the doctors called his complaint gastro-enteritis, Ibelieve; his acquaintances say he died of grief; but I, whosaw him in his dying moments, I say he died of" --Caderousse paused.

　　"Of what?" asked the priest, anxiously and eagerly.

　　"Why, of downright starvation."

　　"Starvation!" exclaimed the abbe, springing from his seat."Why, the vilest animals are not suffered to die by such adeath as that. The very dogs that wander houseless andhomeless in the streets find some pitying hand to cast thema mouthful of bread; and that a man, a Christian, should beallowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other men whocall themselves Christians, is too horrible for belief. Oh,it is impossible -- utterly impossible!"

　　"What I have said, I have said," answered Caderousse.

　　"And you are a fool for having said anything about it," saida voice from the top of the stairs. "Why should you meddlewith what does not concern you?"

　　The two men turned quickly, and saw the sickly countenanceof La Carconte peering between the baluster rails; attractedby the sound of voices, she had feebly dragged herself downthe stairs, and, seated on the lower step, head on knees,she had listened to the foregoing conversation. "Mind yourown business, wife," replied Caderousse sharply. "Thisgentleman asks me for information, which common politenesswill not permit me to refuse."

　　"Politeness, you simpleton!" retorted La Carconte. "Whathave you to do with politeness, I should like to know?Better study a little common prudence. How do you know themotives that person may have for trying to extract all hecan from you?"

　　"I pledge you my word, madam," said the abbe, "that myintentions are good; and that you husband can incur no risk,provided he answers me candidly."

　　"Ah, that's all very fine," retorted the woman. "Nothing iseasier than to begin with fair promises and assurances ofnothing to fear; but when poor, silly folks, like my husbandthere, have been persuaded to tell all they know, thepromises and assurances of safety are quickly forgotten; andat some moment when nobody is expecting it, behold troubleand misery, and all sorts of persecutions, are heaped on theunfortunate wretches, who cannot even see whence all theirafflictions come."

　　"Nay, nay, my good woman, make yourself perfectly easy, Ibeg of you. Whatever evils may befall you, they will not beoccasioned by my instrumentality, that I solemnly promiseyou."

　　La Carconte muttered a few inarticulate words, then let herhead again drop upon her knees, and went into a fit of ague,leaving the two speakers to resume the conversation, butremaining so as to be able to hear every word they uttered.Again the abbe had been obliged to swallow a draught ofwater to calm the emotions that threatened to overpower him.When he had sufficiently recovered himself, he said, "Itappears, then, that the miserable old man you were tellingme of was forsaken by every one. Surely, had not such beenthe case, he would not have perished by so dreadful adeath."

　　"Why, he was not altogether forsaken," continued Caderousse,"for Mercedes the Catalan and Monsieur Morrel were very kindto him; but somehow the poor old man had contracted aprofound hatred for Fernand -- the very person," addedCaderousse with a bitter smile, "that you named just now asbeing one of Dantes' faithful and attached friends."

　　"And was he not so?" asked the abbe.

　　"Gaspard, Gaspard!" murmured the woman, from her seat on thestairs, "mind what you are saying!" Caderousse made no replyto these words, though evidently irritated and annoyed bythe interruption, but, addressing the abbe, said, "Can a manbe faithful to another whose wife he covets and desires forhimself? But Dantes was so honorable and true in his ownnature, that he believed everybody's professions offriendship. Poor Edmond, he was cruelly deceived; but it wasfortunate that he never knew, or he might have found it moredifficult, when on his deathbed, to pardon his enemies. And,whatever people may say," continued Caderousse, in hisnative language, which was not altogether devoid of rudepoetry, "I cannot help being more frightened at the idea ofthe malediction of the dead than the hatred of the living."

　　"Imbecile!" exclaimed La Carconte.

　　"Do you, then, know in what manner Fernand injured Dantes?"inquired the abbe of Caderousse.

　　"Do I? No one better."

　　"Speak out then, say what it was!"

　　"Gaspard!" cried La Carconte, "do as you will; you aremaster -- but if you take my advice you'll hold yourtongue."

　　"Well, wife," replied Caderousse, "I don't know but whatyou're right!"

　　"So you will say nothing?" asked the abbe.

　　"Why, what good would it do?" asked Caderousse. "If the poorlad were living, and came to me and begged that I wouldcandidly tell which were his true and which his falsefriends, why, perhaps, I should not hesitate. But you tellme he is no more, and therefore can have nothing to do withhatred or revenge, so let all such feeling be buried withhim."

　　"You prefer, then," said the abbe, "that I should bestow onmen you say are false and treacherous, the reward intendedfor faithful friendship?"

　　"That is true enough," returned Caderousse. "You say truly,the gift of poor Edmond was not meant for such traitors asFernand and Danglars; besides, what would it be to them? nomore than a drop of water in the ocean."

　　"Remember," chimed in La Carconte, "those two could crushyou at a single blow!"

　　"How so?" inquired the abbe. "Are these persons, then, sorich and powerful?"

　　"Do you not know their history?"

　　"I do not. Pray relate it to me!" Caderousse seemed toreflect for a few moments, then said, "No, truly, it wouldtake up too much time."

　　"Well, my good friend," returned the abbe, in a tone thatindicated utter indifference on his part, "you are atliberty, either to speak or be silent, just as you please;for my own part, I respect your scruples and admire yoursentiments; so let the matter end. I shall do my duty asconscientiously as I can, and fulfil my promise to the dyingman. My first business will be to dispose of this diamond."So saying, the abbe again draw the small box from hispocket, opened it, and contrived to hold it in such a light,that a bright flash of brilliant hues passed before thedazzled gaze of Caderousse.

　　"Wife, wife!" cried he in a hoarse voice, "come here!"

　　"Diamond!" exclaimed La Carconte, rising and descending tothe chamber with a tolerably firm step; "what diamond areyou talking about?"

　　"Why, did you not hear all we said?" inquired Caderousse."It is a beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantes, to besold, and the money divided between his father, Mercedes,his betrothed bride, Fernand, Danglars, and myself. Thejewel is worth at least fifty thousand francs."

　　"Oh, what a magnificent jewel!" cried the astonished woman.

　　"The fifth part of the profits from this stone belongs to usthen, does it not?" asked Caderousse.

　　"It does," replied the abbe; "with the addition of an equaldivision of that part intended for the elder Dantes, which Ibelieve myself at liberty to divide equally with the foursurvivors."

　　"And why among us four?" inquired Caderousse.

　　"As being the friends Edmond esteemed most faithful anddevoted to him."

　　"I don't call those friends who betray and ruin you,"murmured the wife in her turn, in a low, muttering voice.

　　"Of course not!" rejoined Caderousse quickly; "no more do I,and that was what I was observing to this gentleman justnow. I said I looked upon it as a sacrilegious profanationto reward treachery, perhaps crime."

　　"Remember," answered the abbe calmly, as he replaced thejewel and its case in the pocket of his cassock, "it is yourfault, not mine, that I do so. You will have the goodness tofurnish me with the address of both Fernand and Danglars, inorder that I may execute Edmond's last wishes." Theagitation of Caderousse became extreme, and large drops ofperspiration rolled from his heated brow. As he saw the abberise from his seat and go towards the door, as though toascertain if his horse were sufficiently refreshed tocontinue his journey, Caderousse and his wife exchangedlooks of deep meaning.

　　"There, you see, wife," said the former, "this splendiddiamond might all be ours, if we chose!"

　　"Do you believe it?"

　　"Why, surely a man of his holy profession would not deceiveus!"

　　"Well," replied La Carconte, "do as you like. For my part, Iwash my hands of the affair." So saying, she once moreclimbed the staircase leading to her chamber, her bodyconvulsed with chills, and her teeth rattling in her head,in spite of the intense heat of the weather. Arrived at thetop stair, she turned round, and called out, in a warningtone, to her husband, "Gaspard, consider well what you areabout to do!"

　　"I have both reflected and decided," answered he. LaCarconte then entered her chamber, the flooring of whichcreaked beneath her heavy, uncertain tread, as she proceededtowards her arm-chair, into which she fell as thoughexhausted.

　　"Well," asked the abbe, as he returned to the apartmentbelow, "what have you made up your mind to do?"

　　"To tell you all I know," was the reply.

　　"I certainly think you act wisely in so doing," said thepriest. "Not because I have the least desire to learnanything you may please to conceal from me, but simply thatif, through your assistance, I could distribute the legacyaccording to the wishes of the testator, why, so much thebetter, that is all."

　　"I hope it may be so," replied Caderousse, his face flushedwith cupidity.

　　"I am all attention," said the abbe.

　　"Stop a minute," answered Caderousse; "we might beinterrupted in the most interesting part of my story, whichwould be a pity; and it is as well that your visit hithershould be made known only to ourselves." With these words hewent stealthily to the door, which he closed, and, by way ofstill greater precaution, bolted and barred it, as he wasaccustomed to do at night. During this time the abbe hadchosen his place for listening at his ease. He removed hisseat into a corner of the room, where he himself would be indeep shadow, while the light would be fully thrown on thenarrator; then, with head bent down and hands clasped, orrather clinched together, he prepared to give his wholeattention to Caderousse, who seated himself on the littlestool, exactly opposite to him.

　　"Remember, this is no affair of mine," said the tremblingvoice of La Carconte, as though through the flooring of herchamber she viewed the scene that was enacting below.

　　"Enough, enough!" replied Caderousse; "say no more about it;I will take all the consequences upon myself." And he beganhis story.

　　Chapter 27The Story.

　　"First, sir," said Caderousse, "you must make me a promise."

　　"What is that?" inquired the abbe.

　　"Why, if you ever make use of the details I am about to giveyou, that you will never let any one know that it was I whosupplied them; for the persons of whom I am about to talkare rich and powerful, and if they only laid the tips oftheir fingers on me, I should break to pieces like glass."

　　"Make yourself easy, my friend," replied the abbe. "I am apriest, and confessions die in my breast. Recollect, ouronly desire is to carry out, in a fitting manner, the lastwishes of our friend. Speak, then, without reserve, aswithout hatred; tell the truth, the whole truth; I do notknow, never may know, the persons of whom you are about tospeak; besides, I am an Italian, and not a Frenchman, andbelong to God, and not to man, and I shall shortly retire tomy convent, which I have only quitted to fulfil the lastwishes of a dying man." This positive assurance seemed togive Caderousse a little courage.

　　"Well, then, under these circumstances," said Caderousse, "Iwill, I even believe I ought to undeceive you as to thefriendship which poor Edmond thought so sincere andunquestionable."

　　"Begin with his father, if you please." said the abbe;"Edmond talked to me a great deal about the old man for whomhe had the deepest love."

　　"The history is a sad one, sir," said Caderousse, shakinghis head; "perhaps you know all the earlier part of it?"

　　"Yes." answered the abbe; "Edmond related to me everythinguntil the moment when he was arrested in a small cabaretclose to Marseilles."

　　"At La Reserve! Oh, yes; I can see it all before me thismoment."

　　"Was it not his betrothal feast?"

　　"It was and the feast that began so gayly had a verysorrowful ending; a police commissary, followed by foursoldiers, entered, and Dantes was arrested."

　　"Yes, and up to this point I know all," said the priest."Dantes himself only knew that which personally concernedhim, for he never beheld again the five persons I have namedto you, or heard mention of any one of them."

　　"Well, when Dantes was arrested, Monsieur Morrel hastened toobtain the particulars, and they were very sad. The old manreturned alone to his home, folded up his wedding suit withtears in his eyes, and paced up and down his chamber thewhole day, and would not go to bed at all, for I wasunderneath him and heard him walking the whole night; andfor myself, I assure you I could not sleep either, for thegrief of the poor father gave me great uneasiness, and everystep he took went to my heart as really as if his foot hadpressed against my breast. The next day Mercedes came toimplore the protection of M. de Villefort; she did notobtain it, however, and went to visit the old man; when shesaw him so miserable and heart-broken, having passed asleepless night, and not touched food since the previousday, she wished him to go with her that she might take careof him; but the old man would not consent. `No,' was the oldman's reply, `I will not leave this house, for my poor dearboy loves me better than anything in the world; and if hegets out of prison he will come and see me the first thing,and what would he think if I did not wait here for him?' Iheard all this from the window, for I was anxious thatMercedes should persuade the old man to accompany her, forhis footsteps over my head night and day did not leave me amoment's repose."

　　"But did you not go up-stairs and try to console the poorold man?" asked the abbe.

　　"Ah, sir," replied Caderousse, "we cannot console those whowill not be consoled, and he was one of these; besides, Iknow not why, but he seemed to dislike seeing me. One night,however, I heard his sobs, and I could not resist my desireto go up to him, but when I reached his door he was nolonger weeping but praying. I cannot now repeat to you, sir,all the eloquent words and imploring language he made useof; it was more than piety, it was more than grief, and I,who am no canter, and hate the Jesuits, said then to myself,`It is really well, and I am very glad that I have not anychildren; for if I were a father and felt such excessivegrief as the old man does, and did not find in my memory orheart all he is now saying, I should throw myself into thesea at once, for I could not bear it.'"

　　"Poor father!" murmured the priest.

　　"From day to day he lived on alone, and more and moresolitary. M. Morrel and Mercedes came to see him, but hisdoor was closed; and, although I was certain he was at home,he would not make any answer. One day, when, contrary to hiscustom, he had admitted Mercedes, and the poor girl, inspite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to consolehim, he said to her, -- `Be assured, my dear daughter, he isdead; and instead of expecting him, it is he who is awaitingus; I am quite happy, for I am the oldest, and of courseshall see him first.' However well disposed a person may be,why you see we leave off after a time seeing persons who arein sorrow, they make one melancholy; and so at last oldDantes was left all to himself, and I only saw from time totime strangers go up to him and come down again with somebundle they tried to hide; but I guessed what these bundleswere, and that he sold by degrees what he had to pay for hissubsistence. At length the poor old fellow reached the endof all he had; he owed three quarters' rent, and theythreatened to turn him out; he begged for another week,which was granted to him. I know this, because the landlordcame into my apartment when he left his. For the first threedays I heard him walking about as usual, but, on the fourthI heard nothing. I then resolved to go up to him at allrisks. The door was closed, but I looked through thekeyhole, and saw him so pale and haggard, that believing himvery ill, I went and told M. Morrel and then ran on toMercedes. They both came immediately, M. Morrel bringing adoctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of thebowels, and ordered him a limited diet. I was there, too,and I never shall forget the old man's smile at thisprescription. From that time he received all who came; hehad an excuse for not eating any more; the doctor had puthim on a diet." The abbe uttered a kind of groan. "The storyinterests you, does it not, sir?" inquired Caderousse.

　　"Yes," replied the abbe, "it is very affecting."

　　"Mercedes came again, and she found him so altered that shewas even more anxious than before to have him taken to herown home. This was M. Morrel's wish also, who would fainhave conveyed the old man against his consent; but the oldman resisted, and cried so that they were actuallyfrightened. Mercedes remained, therefore, by his bedside,and M. Morrel went away, making a sign to the Catalan thathe had left his purse on the chimney-piece. But availinghimself of the doctor's order, the old man would not takeany sustenance; at length (after nine days of despair andfasting), the old man died, cursing those who had caused hismisery, and saying to Mercedes, `If you ever see my Edmondagain, tell him I die blessing him.'" The abbe rose from hischair, made two turns round the chamber, and pressed histrembling hand against his parched throat. "And you believehe died" --

　　"Of hunger, sir, of hunger," said Caderousse. "I am ascertain of it as that we two are Christians."

　　The abbe, with a shaking hand, seized a glass of water thatwas standing by him half-full, swallowed it at one gulp, andthen resumed his seat, with red eyes and pale cheeks. "Thiswas, indeed, a horrid event." said he in a hoarse voice.

　　"The more so, sir, as it was men's and not God's doing."

　　"Tell me of those men," said the abbe, "and remember too,"he added in an almost menacing tone, "you have promised totell me everything. Tell me, therefore, who are these menwho killed the son with despair, and the father withfamine?"

　　"Two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the otherfrom ambition, -- Fernand and Danglars."

　　"How was this jealousy manifested? Speak on."

　　"They denounced Edmond as a Bonapartist agent."

　　"Which of the two denounced him? Which was the realdelinquent?"

　　"Both, sir; one with a letter, and the other put it in thepost."

　　"And where was this letter written?"

　　"At La Reserve, the day before the betrothal feast."

　　"'Twas so, then -- 'twas so, then," murmured the abbe. "Oh,Faria, Faria, how well did you judge men and things!"

　　"What did you please to say, sir?" asked Caderousse.

　　"Nothing, nothing," replied the priest; "go on."

　　"It was Danglars who wrote the denunciation with his lefthand, that his writing might not be recognized, and Fernandwho put it in the post."

　　"But," exclaimed the abbe suddenly, "you were thereyourself."

　　"I!" said Caderousse, astonished; "who told you I wasthere?"

　　The abbe saw he had overshot the mark, and he added quickly,-- "No one; but in order to have known everything so well,you must have been an eye-witness."

　　"True, true!" said Caderousse in a choking voice, "I wasthere."

　　"And did you not remonstrate against such infamy?" asked theabbe; "if not, you were an accomplice."

　　"Sir," replied Caderousse, "they had made me drink to suchan excess that I nearly lost all perception. I had only anindistinct understanding of what was passing around me. Isaid all that a man in such a state could say; but they bothassured me that it was a jest they were carrying on, andperfectly harmless."

　　"Next day -- next day, sir, you must have seen plain enoughwhat they had been doing, yet you said nothing, though youwere present when Dantes was arrested."

　　"Yes, sir, I was there, and very anxious to speak; butDanglars restrained me. `If he should really be guilty,'said he, `and did really put in to the Island of Elba; if heis really charged with a letter for the Bonapartistcommittee at Paris, and if they find this letter upon him,those who have supported him will pass for his accomplices.'I confess I had my fears, in the state in which politicsthen were, and I held my tongue. It was cowardly, I confess,but it was not criminal."

　　"I understand -- you allowed matters to take their course,that was all."

　　"Yes, sir," answered Caderousse; "and remorse preys on menight and day. I often ask pardon of God, I swear to you,because this action, the only one with which I haveseriously to reproach myself in all my life, is no doubt thecause of my abject condition. I am expiating a moment ofselfishness, and so I always say to La Carconte, when shecomplains, `Hold your tongue, woman; it is the will ofGod.'" And Caderousse bowed his head with every sign of realrepentance.

　　"Well, sir," said the abbe, "you have spoken unreservedly;and thus to accuse yourself is to deserve pardon."

　　"Unfortunately, Edmond is dead, and has not pardoned me."

　　"He did not know," said the abbe.

　　"But he knows it all now," interrupted Caderousse; "they saythe dead know everything." There was a brief silence; theabbe rose and paced up and down pensively, and then resumedhis seat. "You have two or three times mentioned a M.Morrel," he said; "who was he?"

　　"The owner of the Pharaon and patron of Dantes."

　　"And what part did he play in this sad drama?" inquired theabbe.

　　"The part of an honest man, full of courage and real regard.Twenty times he interceded for Edmond. When the emperorreturned, he wrote, implored, threatened, and soenergetically, that on the second restoration he waspersecuted as a Bonapartist. Ten times, as I told you, hecame to see Dantes' father, and offered to receive him inhis own house; and the night or two before his death, as Ihave already said, he left his purse on the mantelpiece,with which they paid the old man's debts, and buried himdecently; and so Edmond's father died, as he had lived,without doing harm to any one. I have the purse still by me-- a large one, made of red silk."

　　"And," asked the abbe, "is M. Morrel still alive?"

　　"Yes," replied Caderousse.

　　"In that case," replied the abbe, "he should be rich,happy."

　　Caderousse smiled bitterly. "Yes, happy as myself," said he.

　　"What! M. Morrel unhappy?" exclaimed the abbe.

　　"He is reduced almost to the last extremity -- nay, he isalmost at the point of dishonor."

　　"How?"

　　"Yes," continued Caderousse, "so it is; after five andtwenty years of labor, after having acquired a mosthonorable name in the trade of Marseilles, M. Morrel isutterly ruined; he has lost five ships in two years, hassuffered by the bankruptcy of three large houses, and hisonly hope now is in that very Pharaon which poor Dantescommanded, and which is expected from the Indies with acargo of cochineal and indigo. If this ship founders, likethe others, he is a ruined man."

　　"And has the unfortunate man wife or children?" inquired theabbe.

　　"Yes, he has a wife, who through everything has behaved likean angel; he has a daughter, who was about to marry the manshe loved, but whose family now will not allow him to wedthe daughter of a ruined man; he has, besides, a son, alieutenant in the army; and, as you may suppose, all this,instead of lessening, only augments his sorrows. If he werealone in the world he would blow out his brains, and therewould be an end."

　　"Horrible!" ejaculated the priest.

　　"And it is thus heaven recompenses virtue, sir," addedCaderousse. "You see, I, who never did a bad action but thatI have told you of -- am in destitution, with my poor wifedying of fever before my very eyes, and I unable to doanything in the world for her; I shall die of hunger, as oldDantes did, while Fernand and Danglars are rolling inwealth."

　　"How is that?"

　　"Because their deeds have brought them good fortune, whilehonest men have been reduced to misery."

　　"What has become of Danglars, the instigator, and thereforethe most guilty?"

　　"What has become of him? Why, he left Marseilles, and wastaken, on the recommendation of M. Morrel, who did not knowhis crime, as cashier into a Spanish bank. During the warwith Spain he was employed in the commissariat of the Frencharmy, and made a fortune; then with that money he speculatedin the funds, and trebled or quadrupled his capital; and,having first married his banker's daughter, who left him awidower, he has married a second time, a widow, a Madame deNargonne, daughter of M. de Servieux, the king'schamberlain, who is in high favor at court. He is amillionaire, and they have made him a baron, and now he isthe Baron Danglars, with a fine residence in the Rue deMont-Blanc, with ten horses in his stables, six footmen inhis ante-chamber, and I know not how many millions in hisstrongbox."

　　"Ah!" said the abbe, in a peculiar tone, "he is happy."

　　"Happy? Who can answer for that? Happiness or unhappiness isthe secret known but to one's self and the walls -- wallshave ears but no tongue; but if a large fortune produceshappiness, Danglars is happy."

　　"And Fernand?"

　　"Fernand? Why, much the same story."

　　"But how could a poor Catalan fisher-boy, without educationor resources, make a fortune? I confess this staggers me."

　　"And it has staggered everybody. There must have been in hislife some strange secret that no one knows."

　　"But, then, by what visible steps has he attained this highfortune or high position?"

　　"Both, sir -- he has both fortune and position -- both."

　　"This must be impossible!"

　　"It would seem so; but listen, and you will understand. Somedays before the return of the emperor, Fernand was drafted.The Bourbons left him quietly enough at the Catalans, butNapoleon returned, a special levy was made, and Fernand wascompelled to join. I went too; but as I was older thanFernand, and had just married my poor wife, I was only sentto the coast. Fernand was enrolled in the active troop, wentto the frontier with his regiment, and was at the battle ofLigny. The night after that battle he was sentry at the doorof a general who carried on a secret correspondence with theenemy. That same night the general was to go over to theEnglish. He proposed to Fernand to accompany him; Fernandagreed to do so, deserted his post, and followed thegeneral. Fernand would have been court-martialed if Napoleonhad remained on the throne, but his action was rewarded bythe Bourbons. He returned to France with the epaulet ofsub-lieutenant, and as the protection of the general, who isin the highest favor, was accorded to him, he was a captainin 1823, during the Spanish war -- that is to say, at thetime when Danglars made his early speculations. Fernand wasa Spaniard, and being sent to Spain to ascertain the feelingof his fellow-countrymen, found Danglars there, got on veryintimate terms with him, won over the support of theroyalists at the capital and in the provinces, receivedpromises and made pledges on his own part, guided hisregiment by paths known to himself alone through themountain gorges which were held by the royalists, and, infact, rendered such services in this brief campaign that,after the taking of Trocadero, he was made colonel, andreceived the title of count and the cross of an officer ofthe Legion of Honor."

　　"Destiny! destiny!" murmured the abbe.

　　"Yes, but listen: this was not all. The war with Spain beingended, Fernand's career was checked by the long peace whichseemed likely to endure throughout Europe. Greece only hadrisen against Turkey, and had begun her war of independence;all eyes were turned towards Athens -- it was the fashion topity and support the Greeks. The French government, withoutprotecting them openly, as you know, gave countenance tovolunteer assistance. Fernand sought and obtained leave togo and serve in Greece, still having his name kept on thearmy roll. Some time after, it was stated that the Comte deMorcerf (this was the name he bore) had entered the serviceof Ali Pasha with the rank of instructor-general. Ali Pashawas killed, as you know, but before he died he recompensedthe services of Fernand by leaving him a considerable sum,with which he returned to France, when he was gazettedlieutenant-general."

　　"So that now?" -- inquired the abbe.

　　"So that now," continued Caderousse, "he owns a magnificenthouse -- No. 27, Rue du Helder, Paris." The abbe opened hismouth, hesitated for a moment, then, making an effort atself-control, he said, "And Mercedes -- they tell me thatshe has disappeared?"

　　"Disappeared," said Caderousse, "yes, as the sun disappears,to rise the next day with still more splendor."

　　"Has she made a fortune also?" inquired the abbe, with anironical smile.

　　"Mercedes is at this moment one of the greatest ladies inParis," replied Caderousse.

　　"Go on," said the abbe; "it seems as if I were listening tothe story of a dream. But I have seen things soextraordinary, that what you tell me seems less astonishingthan it otherwise might."

　　"Mercedes was at first in the deepest despair at the blowwhich deprived her of Edmond. I have told you of herattempts to propitiate M. de Villefort, her devotion to theelder Dantes. In the midst of her despair, a new afflictionovertook her. This was the departure of Fernand -- ofFernand, whose crime she did not know, and whom she regardedas her brother. Fernand went, and Mercedes remained alone.Three months passed and still she wept -- no news of Edmond,no news of Fernand, no companionship save that of an old manwho was dying with despair. One evening, after a day ofaccustomed vigil at the angle of two roads leading toMarseilles from the Catalans, she returned to her home moredepressed than ever. Suddenly she heard a step she knew,turned anxiously around, the door opened, and Fernand,dressed in the uniform of a sub-lieutenant, stood beforeher. It was not the one she wished for most, but it seemedas if a part of her past life had returned to her. Mercedesseized Fernand's hands with a transport which he took forlove, but which was only joy at being no longer alone in theworld, and seeing at last a friend, after long hours ofsolitary sorrow. And then, it must be confessed, Fernand hadnever been hated -- he was only not precisely loved. Anotherpossessed all Mercedes' heart; that other was absent, haddisappeared, perhaps was dead. At this last thought Mercedesburst into a flood of tears, and wrung her hands in agony;but the thought, which she had always repelled before whenit was suggested to her by another, came now in full forceupon her mind; and then, too, old Dantes incessantly said toher, `Our Edmond is dead; if he were not, he would return tous.' The old man died, as I have told you; had he lived,Mercedes, perchance, had not become the wife of another, forhe would have been there to reproach her infidelity. Fernandsaw this, and when he learned of the old man's death hereturned. He was now a lieutenant. At his first coming hehad not said a word of love to Mercedes; at the second hereminded her that he loved her. Mercedes begged for sixmonths more in which to await and mourn for Edmond."

　　"So that," said the abbe, with a bitter smile, "that makeseighteen months in all. What more could the most devotedlover desire?" Then he murmured the words of the Englishpoet, "`Frailty, thy name is woman.'"

　　"Six months afterwards," continued Caderousse, "the marriagetook place in the church of Accoules."

　　"The very church in which she was to have married Edmond,"murmured the priest; "there was only a change ofbride-grooms."

　　"Well, Mercedes was married," proceeded Caderousse; "butalthough in the eyes of the world she appeared calm, shenearly fainted as she passed La Reserve, where, eighteenmonths before, the betrothal had been celebrated with himwhom she might have known she still loved had she looked tothe bottom of her heart. Fernand, more happy, but not moreat his ease -- for I saw at this time he was in constantdread of Edmond's return -- Fernand was very anxious to gethis wife away, and to depart himself. There were too manyunpleasant possibilities associated with the Catalans, andeight days after the wedding they left Marseilles."

　　"Did you ever see Mercedes again?" inquired the priest.

　　"Yes, during the Spanish war, at Perpignan, where Fernandhad left her; she was attending to the education of herson." The abbe started. "Her son?" said he.

　　"Yes," replied Caderousse, "little Albert."

　　"But, then, to be able to instruct her child," continued theabbe, "she must have received an education herself. Iunderstood from Edmond that she was the daughter of a simplefisherman, beautiful but uneducated."

　　"Oh," replied Caderousse, "did he know so little of hislovely betrothed? Mercedes might have been a queen, sir, ifthe crown were to be placed on the heads of the loveliestand most intelligent. Fernand's fortune was already waxinggreat, and she developed with his growing fortune. Shelearned drawing, music -- everything. Besides, I believe,between ourselves, she did this in order to distract hermind, that she might forget; and she only filled her head inorder to alleviate the weight on her heart. But now herposition in life is assured," continued Caderousse; "nodoubt fortune and honors have comforted her; she is rich, acountess, and yet" -- Caderousse paused.

　　"And yet what?" asked the abbe.

　　"Yet, I am sure, she is not happy," said Caderousse.

　　"What makes you believe this?"

　　"Why, when I found myself utterly destitute, I thought myold friends would, perhaps, assist me. So I went toDanglars, who would not even receive me. I called onFernand, who sent me a hundred francs by hisvalet-de-chambre."

　　"Then you did not see either of them?"

　　"No, but Madame de Morcerf saw me."

　　"How was that?"

　　"As I went away a purse fell at my feet -- it contained fiveand twenty louis; I raised my head quickly, and sawMercedes, who at once shut the blind."

　　"And M. de Villefort?" asked the abbe.

　　"Oh, he never was a friend of mine, I did not know him, andI had nothing to ask of him."

　　"Do you not know what became of him, and the share he had inEdmond's misfortunes?"

　　"No; I only know that some time after Edmond's arrest, hemarried Mademoiselle de Saint-Meran, and soon after leftMarseilles; no doubt he has been as lucky as the rest; nodoubt he is as rich as Danglars, as high in station asFernand. I only, as you see, have remained poor, wretched,and forgotten."

　　"You are mistaken, my friend," replied the abbe; "God mayseem sometimes to forget for a time, while his justicereposes, but there always comes a moment when he remembers-- and behold -- a proof!" As he spoke, the abbe took thediamond from his pocket, and giving it to Caderousse, said,-- "Here, my friend, take this diamond, it is yours."

　　"What, for me only?" cried Caderousse, "ah, sir, do not jestwith me!"

　　"This diamond was to have been shared among his friends.Edmond had one friend only, and thus it cannot be divided.Take the diamond, then, and sell it; it is worth fiftythousand francs, and I repeat my wish that this sum maysuffice to release you from your wretchedness."

　　"Oh, sir," said Caderousse, putting out one hand timidly,and with the other wiping away the perspiration whichbedewed his brow, -- "Oh, sir, do not make a jest of thehappiness or despair of a man."

　　"I know what happiness and what despair are, and I nevermake a jest of such feelings. Take it, then, but in exchange-- "

　　Caderousse, who touched the diamond, withdrew his hand. Theabbe smiled. "In exchange," he continued, "give me the redsilk purse that M. Morrel left on old Dantes' chimney-piece,and which you tell me is still in your hands." Caderousse,more and more astonished, went toward a large oakencupboard, opened it, and gave the abbe a long purse of fadedred silk, round which were two copper runners that had oncebeen gilt. The abbe took it, and in return gave Caderoussethe diamond.

　　"Oh, you are a man of God, sir," cried Caderousse; "for noone knew that Edmond had given you this diamond, and youmight have kept it."

　　"Which," said the abbe to himself, "you would have done."The abbe rose, took his hat and gloves. "Well," he said,"all you have told me is perfectly true, then, and I maybelieve it in every particular."

　　"See, sir," replied Caderousse, "in this corner is acrucifix in holy wood -- here on this shelf is my wife'stestament; open this book, and I will swear upon it with myhand on the crucifix. I will swear to you by my soul'ssalvation, my faith as a Christian, I have told everythingto you as it occurred, and as the recording angel will tellit to the ear of God at the day of the last judgment!"

　　"'Tis well," said the abbe, convinced by his manner and tonethat Caderousse spoke the truth. "'Tis well, and may thismoney profit you! Adieu; I go far from men who thus sobitterly injure each other." The abbe with difficulty gotaway from the enthusiastic thanks of Caderousse, opened thedoor himself, got out and mounted his horse, once moresaluted the innkeeper, who kept uttering his loud farewells,and then returned by the road he had travelled in coming.When Caderousse turned around, he saw behind him LaCarconte, paler and trembling more than ever. "Is, then, allthat I have heard really true?" she inquired.

　　"What? That he has given the diamond to us only?" inquiredCaderousse, half bewildered with joy; "yes, nothing moretrue! See, here it is." The woman gazed at it a moment, andthen said, in a gloomy voice, "Suppose it's false?"Caderousse started and turned pale. "False!" he muttered."False! Why should that man give me a false diamond?"

　　"To get your secret without paying for it, you blockhead!"

　　Caderousse remained for a moment aghast under the weight ofsuch an idea. "Oh!" he said, taking up his hat, which heplaced on the red handkerchief tied round his head, "we willsoon find out."

　　"In what way?"

　　"Why, the fair is on at Beaucaire, there are alwaysjewellers from Paris there, and I will show it to them. Lookafter the house, wife, and I shall be back in two hours,"and Caderousse left the house in haste, and ran rapidly inthe direction opposite to that which the priest had taken."Fifty thousand francs!" muttered La Carconte when leftalone; "it is a large sum of money, but it is not afortune."

　　Chapter 28The Prison Register.

　　The day after that in which the scene we have just describedhad taken place on the road between Bellegarde andBeaucaire, a man of about thirty or two and thirty, dressedin a bright blue frock coat, nankeen trousers, and a whitewaistcoat, having the appearance and accent of anEnglishman, presented himself before the mayor ofMarseilles. "Sir," said he, "I am chief clerk of the houseof Thomson & French, of Rome. We are, and have been theseten years, connected with the house of Morrel & Son, ofMarseilles. We have a hundred thousand francs or thereaboutsloaned on their securities, and we are a little uneasy atreports that have reached us that the firm is on the brinkof ruin. I have come, therefore, express from Rome, to askyou for information."

　　"Sir," replied the mayor. "I know very well that during thelast four or five years misfortune has seemed to pursue M.Morrel. He has lost four or five vessels, and suffered bythree or four bankruptcies; but it is not for me, although Iam a creditor myself to the amount of ten thousand francs,to give any information as to the state of his finances. Askof me, as mayor, what is my opinion of M. Morrel, and Ishall say that he is a man honorable to the last degree, andwho has up to this time fulfilled every engagement withscrupulous punctuality. This is all I can say, sir; if youwish to learn more, address yourself to M. de Boville, theinspector of prisons, No. 15, Rue de Nouailles; he has, Ibelieve, two hundred thousand francs in Morrel's hands, andif there be any grounds for apprehension, as this is agreater amount than mine, you will most probably find himbetter informed than myself."

　　The Englishman seemed to appreciate this extreme delicacy,made his bow and went away, proceeding with a characteristicBritish stride towards the street mentioned. M. de Bovillewas in his private room, and the Englishman, on perceivinghim, made a gesture of surprise, which seemed to indicatethat it was not the first time he had been in his presence.As to M. de Boville, he was in such a state of despair, thatit was evident all the faculties of his mind, absorbed inthe thought which occupied him at the moment, did not alloweither his memory or his imagination to stray to the past.The Englishman, with the coolness of his nation, addressedhim in terms nearly similar to those with which he hadaccosted the mayor of Marseilles. "Oh, sir," exclaimed M. deBoville, "your fears are unfortunately but too well founded,and you see before you a man in despair. I had two hundredthousand francs placed in the hands of Morrel & Son; thesetwo hundred thousand francs were the dowry of my daughter,who was to be married in a fortnight, and these two hundredthousand francs were payable, half on the 15th of thismonth, and the other half on the 15th of next month. I hadinformed M. Morrel of my desire to have these paymentspunctually, and he has been here within the last half-hourto tell me that if his ship, the Pharaon, did not come intoport on the 15th, he would be wholly unable to make thispayment."

　　"But," said the Englishman, "this looks very much like asuspension of payment."

　　"It looks more like bankruptcy!" exclaimed M. de Bovilledespairingly.

　　The Englishman appeared to reflect a moment, and then said,-- "From which it would appear, sir, that this creditinspires you with considerable apprehension?"

　　"To tell you the truth, I consider it lost."

　　"Well, then, I will buy it of you!"

　　"You?"

　　"Yes, I!"

　　"But at a tremendous discount, of course?"

　　"No, for two hundred thousand francs. Our house," added theEnglishman with a laugh, "does not do things in that way."

　　"And you will pay" --

　　"Ready money." And the Englishman drew from his pocket abundle of bank-notes, which might have been twice the sum M.de Boville feared to lose. A ray of joy passed across M. deBoville's countenance, yet he made an effort atself-control, and said, -- "Sir, I ought to tell you that,in all probability, you will not realize six per cent ofthis sum."

　　"That's no affair of mine," replied the Englishman, "that isthe affair of the house of Thomson & French, in whose name Iact. They have, perhaps, some motive to serve in hasteningthe ruin of a rival firm. But all I know, sir, is, that I amready to hand you over this sum in exchange for yourassignment of the debt. I only ask a brokerage."

　　"Of course, that is perfectly just," cried M. de Boville."The commission is usually one and a half; will you have two-- three -- five per cent, or even more? Whatever you say."

　　"Sir," replied the Englishman, laughing, "I am like myhouse, and do not do such things -- no, the commission I askis quite different."

　　"Name it, sir, I beg."

　　"You are the inspector of prisons?"

　　"I have been so these fourteen years."

　　"You keep the registers of entries and departures?"

　　"I do."

　　"To these registers there are added notes relative to theprisoners?"

　　"There are special reports on every prisoner."

　　"Well, sir, I was educated at home by a poor devil of anabbe, who disappeared suddenly. I have since learned that hewas confined in the Chateau d'If, and I should like to learnsome particulars of his death."

　　"What was his name?"

　　"The Abbe Faria."

　　"Oh, I recollect him perfectly," cried M. de Boville; "hewas crazy."

　　"So they said."

　　"Oh, he was, decidedly."

　　"Very possibly; but what sort of madness was it?"

　　"He pretended to know of an immense treasure, and offeredvast sums to the government if they would liberate him."

　　"Poor devil! -- and he is dead?"

　　"Yes, sir, five or six months ago -- last February."

　　"You have a good memory, sir, to recollect dates so well."

　　"I recollect this, because the poor devil's death wasaccompanied by a singular incident."

　　"May I ask what that was?" said the Englishman with anexpression of curiosity, which a close observer would havebeen astonished at discovering in his phlegmaticcountenance.

　　"Oh dear, yes, sir; the abbe's dungeon was forty or fiftyfeet distant from that of one of Bonaparte's emissaries, --one of those who had contributed the most to the return ofthe usurper in 1815, -- a very resolute and very dangerousman."

　　"Indeed!" said the Englishman.

　　"Yes," replied M. de Boville; "I myself had occasion to seethis man in 1816 or 1817, and we could only go into hisdungeon with a file of soldiers. That man made a deepimpression on me; I shall never forget his countenance!" TheEnglishman smiled imperceptibly.

　　"And you say, sir," he interposed, "that the two dungeons"--

　　"Were separated by a distance of fifty feet; but it appearsthat this Edmond Dantes" --

　　"This dangerous man's name was" --

　　"Edmond Dantes. It appears, sir, that this Edmond Dantes hadprocured tools, or made them, for they found a tunnelthrough which the prisoners held communication with oneanother."

　　"This tunnel was dug, no doubt, with an intention ofescape?"

　　"No doubt; but unfortunately for the prisoners, the AbbeFaria had an attack of catalepsy, and died."

　　"That must have cut short the projects of escape."

　　"For the dead man, yes," replied M. de Boville, "but not forthe survivor; on the contrary, this Dantes saw a means ofaccelerating his escape. He, no doubt, thought thatprisoners who died in the Chateau d'If were interred in anordinary burial-ground, and he conveyed the dead man intohis own cell, took his place in the sack in which they hadsewed up the corpse, and awaited the moment of interment."

　　"It was a bold step, and one that showed some courage,"remarked the Englishman.

　　"As I have already told you, sir, he was a very dangerousman; and, fortunately, by his own act disembarrassed thegovernment of the fears it had on his account."

　　"How was that?"

　　"How? Do you not comprehend?"

　　"No."

　　"The Chateau d'If has no cemetery, and they simply throw thedead into the sea, after fastening a thirty-six poundcannon-ball to their feet."

　　"Well," observed the Englishman as if he were slow ofcomprehension.

　　"Well, they fastened a thirty-six pound ball to his feet,and threw him into the sea."

　　"Really!" exclaimed the Englishman.

　　"Yes, sir," continued the inspector of prisons. "You mayimagine the amazement of the fugitive when he found himselfflung headlong over the rocks! I should like to have seenhis face at that moment."

　　"That would have been difficult."

　　"No matter," replied De Boville, in supreme good-humor atthe certainty of recovering his two hundred thousand francs,-- "no matter, I can fancy it." And he shouted withlaughter.

　　"So can I," said the Englishman, and he laughed too; but helaughed as the English do, "at the end of his teeth."

　　"And so," continued the Englishman who first gained hiscomposure, "he was drowned?"

　　"Unquestionably."

　　"So that the governor got rid of the dangerous and the crazyprisoner at the same time?"

　　"Precisely."

　　"But some official document was drawn up as to this affair,I suppose?" inquired the Englishman.

　　"Yes, yes, the mortuary deposition. You understand, Dantes'relations, if he had any, might have some interest inknowing if he were dead or alive."

　　"So that now, if there were anything to inherit from him,they may do so with easy conscience. He is dead, and nomistake about it."

　　"Oh, yes; and they may have the fact attested whenever theyplease."

　　"So be it," said the Englishman. "But to return to theseregisters."

　　"True, this story has diverted our attention from them.Excuse me."

　　"Excuse you for what? For the story? By no means; it reallyseems to me very curious."

　　"Yes, indeed. So, sir, you wish to see all relating to thepoor abbe, who really was gentleness itself."

　　"Yes, you will much oblige me."

　　"Go into my study here, and I will show it to you." And theyboth entered M. de Boville's study. Everything was herearranged in perfect order; each register had its number,each file of papers its place. The inspector begged theEnglishman to seat himself in an arm-chair, and placedbefore him the register and documents relative to theChateau d'If, giving him all the time he desired for theexamination, while De Boville seated himself in a corner,and began to read his newspaper. The Englishman easily foundthe entries relative to the Abbe Faria; but it seemed thatthe history which the inspector had related interested himgreatly, for after having perused the first documents heturned over the leaves until he reached the depositionrespecting Edmond Dantes. There he found everything arrangedin due order, -- the accusation, examination, Morrel'spetition, M. de Villefort's marginal notes. He folded up theaccusation quietly, and put it as quietly in his pocket;read the examination, and saw that the name of Noirtier wasnot mentioned in it; perused, too, the application dated10th April, 1815, in which Morrel, by the deputy procureur'sadvice, exaggerated with the best intentions (for Napoleonwas then on the throne) the services Dantes had rendered tothe imperial cause -- services which Villefort'scertificates rendered indispensable. Then he saw through thewhole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept back byVillefort, had become, under the second restoration, aterrible weapon against him in the hands of the king'sattorney. He was no longer astonished when he searched on tofind in the register this note, placed in a bracket againsthis name: --

　　Edmond Dantes.

　　An inveterate Bonapartist; took an active part in the returnfrom the Island of Elba.

　　To be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closelywatched and guarded.

　　Beneath these lines was written in another hand: "See noteabove -- nothing can be done." He compared the writing inthe bracket with the writing of the certificate placedbeneath Morrel's petition, and discovered that the note inthe bracket was the some writing as the certificate -- thatis to say, was in Villefort's handwriting. As to the notewhich accompanied this, the Englishman understood that itmight have been added by some inspector who had taken amomentary interest in Dantes' situation, but who had, fromthe remarks we have quoted, found it impossible to give anyeffect to the interest he had felt.

　　As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that hemight not disturb the Abbe Faria's pupil in his researches,had seated himself in a corner, and was reading Le DrapeauBlanc. He did not see the Englishman fold up and place inhis pocket the accusation written by Danglars under thearbor of La Reserve, and which had the postmark,"Marseilles, 27th Feb., delivery 6 o'clock, P.M." But itmust be said that if he had seen it, he attached so littleimportance to this scrap of paper, and so much importance tohis two hundred thousand francs, that he would not haveopposed whatever the Englishman might do, however irregularit might be.

　　"Thanks," said the latter, closing the register with a slam,"I have all I want; now it is for me to perform my promise.Give me a simple assignment of your debt; acknowledgetherein the receipt of the cash, and I will hand you overthe money." He rose, gave his seat to M. de Boville, whotook it without ceremony, and quickly drew up the requiredassignment, while the Englishman counted out the bank-noteson the other side of the desk.

　　Chapter 29The House of Morrel & Son.

　　Any one who had quitted Marseilles a few years previously,well acquainted with the interior of Morrel's warehouse, andhad returned at this date, would have found a great change.Instead of that air of life, of comfort, and of happinessthat permeates a flourishing and prosperous businessestablishment -- instead of merry faces at the windows, busyclerks hurrying to and fro in the long corridors -- insteadof the court filled with bales of goods, re-echoing with thecries and the jokes of porters, one would have immediatelyperceived all aspect of sadness and gloom. Out of all thenumerous clerks that used to fill the deserted corridor andthe empty office, but two remained. One was a young man ofthree or four and twenty, who was in love with M. Morrel'sdaughter, and had remained with him in spite of the effortsof his friends to induce him to withdraw; the other was anold one-eyed cashier, called "Cocles," or "Cock-eye," anickname given him by the young men who used to throng thisvast now almost deserted bee-hive, and which had socompletely replaced his real name that he would not, in allprobability, have replied to any one who addressed him byit.

　　Cocles remained in M. Morrel's service, and a most singularchange had taken place in his position; he had at the sametime risen to the rank of cashier, and sunk to the rank of aservant. He was, however, the same Cocles, good, patient,devoted, but inflexible on the subject of arithmetic, theonly point on which he would have stood firm against theworld, even against M. Morrel; and strong in themultiplication-table, which he had at his fingers' ends, nomatter what scheme or what trap was laid to catch him. Inthe midst of the disasters that befell the house, Cocles wasthe only one unmoved. But this did not arise from a want ofaffection; on the contrary, from a firm conviction. Like therats that one by one forsake the doomed ship even before thevessel weighs anchor, so all the numerous clerks had bydegrees deserted the office and the warehouse. Cocles hadseen them go without thinking of inquiring the cause oftheir departure. Everything was as we have said, a questionof arithmetic to Cocles, and during twenty years he hadalways seen all payments made with such exactitude, that itseemed as impossible to him that the house should stoppayment, as it would to a miller that the river that had solong turned his mill should cease to flow.

　　Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles' belief; thelast month's payment had been made with the most scrupulousexactitude; Cocles had detected an overbalance of fourteensous in his cash, and the same evening he had brought themto M. Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile, threw them intoan almost empty drawer, saying: --

　　"Thanks, Cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers "

　　Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M.Morrel, himself the pearl of the honest men of Marseilles,flattered him more than a present of fifty crowns. But sincethe end of the month M. Morrel had passed many an anxioushour. In order to meet the payments then due; he hadcollected all his resources, and, fearing lest the report ofhis distress should get bruited abroad at Marseilles when hewas known to be reduced to such an extremity, he went to theBeaucaire fair to sell his wife's and daughter's jewels anda portion of his plate. By this means the end of the monthwas passed, but his resources were now exhausted. Credit,owing to the reports afloat, was no longer to be had; and tomeet the one hundred thousand francs due on the 10th of thepresent month, and the one hundred thousand francs due onthe 15th of the next month to M. de Boville, M. Morrel had,in reality, no hope but the return of the Pharaon, of whosedeparture he had learnt from a vessel which had weighedanchor at the same time, and which had already arrived inharbor. But this vessel which, like the Pharaon, came fromCalcutta, had been in for a fortnight, while no intelligencehad been received of the Pharaon.

　　Such was the state of affairs when, the day after hisinterview with M. de Boville, the confidential clerk of thehouse of Thomson & French of Rome, presented himself at M.Morrel's. Emmanuel received him; this young man was alarmedby the appearance of every new face, for every new facemight be that of a new creditor, come in anxiety to questionthe head of the house. The young man, wishing to spare hisemployer the pain of this interview, questioned thenew-comer; but the stranger declared that he had nothing tosay to M. Emmanuel, and that his business was with M. Morrelin person. Emmanuel sighed, and summoned Cocles. Coclesappeared, and the young man bade him conduct the stranger toM. Morrel's apartment. Cocles went first, and the strangerfollowed him. On the staircase they met a beautiful girl ofsixteen or seventeen, who looked with anxiety at thestranger.

　　"M. Morrel is in his room, is he not, Mademoiselle Julie?"said the cashier.

　　"Yes; I think so, at least," said the young girlhesitatingly. "Go and see, Cocles, and if my father isthere, announce this gentleman."

　　"It will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle," returnedthe Englishman. "M. Morrel does not know my name; thisworthy gentleman has only to announce the confidential clerkof the house of Thomson & French of Rome, with whom yourfather does business."

　　The young girl turned pale and continued to descend, whilethe stranger and Cocles continued to mount the staircase.She entered the office where Emmanuel was, while Cocles, bythe aid of a key he possessed, opened a door in the cornerof a landing-place on the second staircase, conducted thestranger into an ante-chamber, opened a second door, whichhe closed behind him, and after having left the clerk of thehouse of Thomson & French alone, returned and signed to himthat he could enter. The Englishman entered, and foundMorrel seated at a table, turning over the formidablecolumns of his ledger, which contained the list of hisliabilities. At the sight of the stranger, M. Morrel closedthe ledger, arose, and offered a seat to the stranger; andwhen he had seen him seated, resumed his own chair. Fourteenyears had changed the worthy merchant, who, in histhirty-sixth year at the opening of this history, was now inhis fiftieth; his hair had turned white, time and sorrow hadploughed deep furrows on his brow, and his look, once sofirm and penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, asif he feared being forced to fix his attention on someparticular thought or person. The Englishman looked at himwith an air of curiosity, evidently mingled with interest."Monsieur," said Morrel, whose uneasiness was increased bythis examination, "you wish to speak to me?"

　　"Yes, monsieur; you are aware from whom I come?"

　　"The house of Thomson & French; at least, so my cashiertells me."

　　"He has told you rightly. The house of Thomson & French had300,000 or 400,000 francs to pay this month in France; and,knowing your strict punctuality, have collected all thebills bearing your signature, and charged me as they becamedue to present them, and to employ the money otherwise."Morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead,which was covered with perspiration.

　　"So then, sir," said Morrel, "you hold bills of mine?"

　　"Yes, and for a considerable sum."

　　"What is the amount?" asked Morrel with a voice he strove torender firm.

　　"Here is," said the Englishman, taking a quantity of papersfrom his pocket, "an assignment of 200,000 francs to ourhouse by M. de Boville, the inspector of prisons, to whomthey are due. You acknowledge, of course, that you owe thissum to him?"

　　"Yes; he placed the money in my hands at four and a half percent nearly five years ago."

　　"When are you to pay?"

　　"Half the 15th of this month, half the 15th of next."

　　"Just so; and now here are 32,500 francs payable shortly;they are all signed by you, and assigned to our house by theholders."

　　"I recognize them," said Morrel, whose face was suffused, ashe thought that, for the first time in his life, he would beunable to honor his own signature. "Is this all?"

　　"No, I have for the end of the month these bills which havebeen assigned to us by the house of Pascal, and the house ofWild & Turner of Marseilles, amounting to nearly 55,000francs; in all, 287,500 francs." It is impossible todescribe what Morrel suffered during this enumeration. "Twohundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred francs,"repeated he.

　　"Yes, sir," replied the Englishman. "I will not," continuedhe, after a moment's silence, "conceal from you, that whileyour probity and exactitude up to this moment areuniversally acknowledged, yet the report is current inMarseilles that you are not able to meet your liabilities."At this almost brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale."Sir," said he, "up to this time -- and it is now more thanfour-and-twenty years since I received the direction of thishouse from my father, who had himself conducted it for fiveand thirty years -- never has anything bearing the signatureof Morrel & Son been dishonored."

　　"I know that," replied the Englishman. "But as a man ofhonor should answer another, tell me fairly, shall you paythese with the same punctuality?" Morrel shuddered, andlooked at the man, who spoke with more assurance than he hadhitherto shown. "To questions frankly put," said he, "astraightforward answer should be given. Yes, I shall pay,if, as I hope, my vessel arrives safely; for its arrivalwill again procure me the credit which the numerousaccidents, of which I have been the victim, have deprivedme; but if the Pharaon should be lost, and this lastresource be gone" -- the poor man's eyes filled with tears.

　　"Well," said the other, "if this last resource fail you?"

　　"Well," returned Morrel, "it is a cruel thing to be forcedto say, but, already used to misfortune, I must habituatemyself to shame. I fear I shall be forced to suspendpayment."

　　"Have you no friends who could assist you?" Morrel smiledmournfully. "In business, sir," said he, "one has nofriends, only correspondents."

　　"It is true," murmured the Englishman; "then you have butone hope."

　　"But one."

　　"The last?"

　　"The last."

　　"So that if this fail" --

　　"I am ruined, -- completely ruined!"

　　"As I was on my way here, a vessel was coming into port."

　　"I know it, sir; a young man, who still adheres to my fallenfortunes, passes a part of his time in a belvidere at thetop of the house, in hopes of being the first to announcegood news to me; he has informed me of the arrival of thisship."

　　"And it is not yours?"

　　"No, she is a Bordeaux vessel, La Gironde; she comes fromIndia also; but she is not mine."

　　"Perhaps she has spoken the Pharaon, and brings you sometidings of her?"

　　"Shall I tell you plainly one thing, sir? I dread almost asmuch to receive any tidings of my vessel as to remain indoubt. uncertainty is still hope." Then in a low voiceMorrel added, -- "This delay is not natural. The Pharaonleft Calcutta the 5th February; she ought to have been herea month ago."

　　"What is that?" said the Englishman. "What is the meaning ofthat noise?"

　　"Oh, oh!" cried Morrel, turning pale, "what is it?" A loudnoise was heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, andhalf-stifled sobs. Morrel rose and advanced to the door; buthis strength failed him and he sank into a chair. The twomen remained opposite one another, Morrel trembling in everylimb, the stranger gazing at him with an air of profoundpity. The noise had ceased; but it seemed that Morrelexpected something -- something had occasioned the noise,and something must follow. The stranger fancied he heardfootsteps on the stairs; and that the footsteps, which werethose of several persons, stopped at the door. A key wasinserted in the lock of the first door, and the creaking ofhinges was audible.

　　"There are only two persons who have the key to that door,"murmured Morrel, "Cocles and Julie." At this instant thesecond door opened, and the young girl, her eyes bathed withtears, appeared. Morrel rose tremblingly, supporting himselfby the arm of the chair. He would have spoken, but his voicefailed him. "Oh, father!" said she, clasping her hands,"forgive your child for being the bearer of evil tidings."

　　Morrel again changed color. Julie threw herself into hisarms.

　　"Oh, father, father!" murmured she, "courage!"

　　"The Pharaon has gone down, then?" said Morrel in a hoarsevoice. The young girl did not speak; but she made anaffirmative sign with her head as she lay on her father'sbreast.

　　"And the crew?" asked Morrel.

　　"Saved," said the girl; "saved by the crew of the vesselthat has just entered the harbor." Morrel raised his twohands to heaven with an expression of resignation andsublime gratitude. "Thanks, my God," said he, "at least thoustrikest but me alone." A tear moistened the eye of thephlegmatic Englishman.

　　"Come in, come in," said Morrel, "for I presume you are allat the door."

　　Scarcely had he uttered those words than Madame Morrelentered weeping bitterly. Emmanuel followed her, and in theantechamber were visible the rough faces of seven or eighthalf-naked sailors. At the sight of these men the Englishmanstarted and advanced a step; then restrained himself, andretired into the farthest and most obscure corner of theapartment. Madame Morrel sat down by her husband and tookone of his hands in hers, Julie still lay with her head onhis shoulder, Emmanuel stood in the centre of the chamberand seemed to form the link between Morrel's family and thesailors at the door.

　　"How did this happen?" said Morrel.

　　"Draw nearer, Penelon," said the young man, "and tell us allabout it."

　　An old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced,twirling the remains of a tarpaulin between his hands."Good-day, M. Morrel," said he, as if he had just quittedMarseilles the previous evening, and had just returned fromAix or Toulon.

　　"Good-day, Penelon," returned Morrel, who could not refrainfrom smiling through his tears, "where is the captain?"

　　"The captain, M. Morrel, -- he has stayed behind sick atPalma; but please God, it won't be much, and you will seehim in a few days all alive and hearty."

　　"Well, now tell your story, Penelon."

　　Penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand beforehis mouth, turned his head, and sent a long jet oftobacco-juice into the antechamber, advanced his foot,balanced himself, and began, -- "You see, M. Morrel," saidhe, "we were somewhere between Cape Blanc and Cape Boyador,sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west after a week'scalm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me -- I was at thehelm I should tell you -- and says, `Penelon, what do youthink of those clouds coming up over there?' I was just thenlooking at them myself. `What do I think, captain? Why Ithink that they are rising faster than they have anybusiness to do, and that they would not be so black if theydidn't mean mischief.' -- `That's my opinion too,' said thecaptain, `and I'll take precautions accordingly. We arecarrying too much canvas. Avast, there, all hands! Take inthe studding-sl's and stow the flying jib.' It was time; thesquall was on us, and the vessel began to heel. `Ah,' saidthe captain, `we have still too much canvas set; all handslower the mains'l!' Five minutes after, it was down; and wesailed under mizzen-tops'ls and to'gall'nt sails. `Well,Penelon,' said the captain, `what makes you shake yourhead?' `Why,' I says, `I still think you've got too muchon.' `I think you're right,' answered he, `we shall have agale.' `A gale? More than that, we shall have a tempest, orI don't know what's what.' You could see the wind cominglike the dust at Montredon; luckily the captain understoodhis business. `Take in two reefs in the tops'ls,' cried thecaptain; `let go the bowlin's, haul the brace, lower theto'gall'nt sails, haul out the reef-tackles on the yards.'"

　　"That was not enough for those latitudes," said theEnglishman; "I should have taken four reefs in the topsailsand furled the spanker."

　　His firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made every onestart. Penelon put his hand over his eyes, and then staredat the man who thus criticized the manoeuvres of hiscaptain. "We did better than that, sir," said the old sailorrespectfully; "we put the helm up to run before the tempest;ten minutes after we struck our tops'ls and scudded underbare poles."

　　"The vessel was very old to risk that," said the Englishman.

　　"Eh, it was that that did the business; after pitchingheavily for twelve hours we sprung a leak. `Penelon,' saidthe captain, `I think we are sinking, give me the helm, andgo down into the hold.' I gave him the helm, and descended;there was already three feet of water. `All hands to thepumps!' I shouted; but it was too late, and it seemed themore we pumped the more came in. `Ah,' said I, after fourhours' work, `since we are sinking, let us sink; we can diebut once.' `That's the example you set, Penelon,' cries thecaptain; `very well, wait a minute.' He went into his cabinand came back with a brace of pistols. `I will blow thebrains out of the first man who leaves the pump,' said he."

　　"Well done!" said the Englishman.

　　"There's nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons,"continued the sailor; "and during that time the wind hadabated, and the sea gone down, but the water kept rising;not much, only two inches an hour, but still it rose. Twoinches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve hours thatmakes two feet, and three we had before, that makes five.`Come,' said the captain, `we have done all in our power,and M. Morrel will have nothing to reproach us with, we havetried to save the ship, let us now save ourselves. To theboats, my lads, as quick as you can.' Now," continuedPenelon, "you see, M. Morrel, a sailor is attached to hisship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to betold twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us,and seemed to say, `Get along -- save yourselves.' We soonlaunched the boat, and all eight of us got into it. Thecaptain descended last, or rather, he did not descend, hewould not quit the vessel; so I took him round the waist,and threw him into the boat, and then I jumped after him. Itwas time, for just as I jumped the deck burst with a noiselike the broadside of a man-of-war. Ten minutes after shepitched forward, then the other way, spun round and round,and then good-by to the Pharaon. As for us, we were threedays without anything to eat or drink, so that we began tothink of drawing lots who should feed the rest, when we sawLa Gironde; we made signals of distress, she perceived us,made for us, and took us all on board. There now, M. Morrel,that's the whole truth, on the honor of a sailor; is not ittrue, you fellows there?" A general murmur of approbationshowed that the narrator had faithfully detailed theirmisfortunes and sufferings.

　　"Well, well," said M. Morrel, "I know there was no one infault but destiny. It was the will of God that this shouldhappen, blessed be his name. What wages are due to you?"

　　"Oh, don't let us talk of that, M. Morrel."

　　"Yes, but we will talk of it."

　　"Well, then, three months," said Penelon.

　　"Cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these goodfellows," said Morrel. "At another time," added be, "Ishould have said, Give them, besides, two hundred francsover as a present; but times are changed, and the littlemoney that remains to me is not my own."

　　Penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged a few wordswith them.

　　"As for that, M. Morrel," said he, again turning his quid,"as for that" --

　　"As for what?"

　　"The money."

　　"Well" --

　　"Well, we all say that fifty francs will be enough for us atpresent, and that we will wait for the rest."

　　"Thanks, my friends, thanks!" cried Morrel gratefully; "takeit -- take it; and if you can find another employer, enterhis service; you are free to do so." These last wordsproduced a prodigious effect on the seaman. Penelon nearlyswallowed his quid; fortunately he recovered. "What, M.Morrel!" said he in a low voice, "you send us away; you arethen angry with us!"

　　"No, no," said M. Morrel, "I am not angry, quite thecontrary, and I do not send you away; but I have no moreships, and therefore I do not want any sailors."

　　"No more ships!" returned Penelon; "well, then, you'll buildsome; we'll wait for you."

　　"I have no money to build ships with, Penelon," said thepoor owner mournfully, "so I cannot accept your kind offer."

　　"No more money? Then you must not pay us; we can scud, likethe Pharaon, under bare poles."

　　"Enough, enough!" cried Morrel, almost overpowered; "leaveme, I pray you; we shall meet again in a happier time.Emmanuel, go with them, and see that my orders areexecuted."

　　"At least, we shall see each other again, M. Morrel?" askedPenelon.

　　"Yes; I hope so, at least. Now go." He made a sign toCocles, who went first; the seamen followed him and Emmanuelbrought up the rear. "Now," said the owner to his wife anddaughter, "leave me; I wish to speak with this gentleman."And he glanced towards the clerk of Thomson & French, whohad remained motionless in the corner during this scene, inwhich he had taken no part, except the few words we havementioned. The two women looked at this person whosepresence they had entirely forgotten, and retired; but, asshe left the apartment, Julie gave the stranger asupplicating glance, to which he replied by a smile that anindifferent spectator would have been surprised to see onhis stern features. The two men were left alone. "Well,sir," said Morrel, sinking into a chair, "you have heardall, and I have nothing further to tell you."

　　"I see," returned the Englishman, "that a fresh andunmerited misfortune his overwhelmed you, and this onlyincreases my desire to serve you."

　　"Oh, sir!" cried Morrel.

　　"Let me see," continued the stranger, "I am one of yourlargest creditors."

　　"Your bills, at least, are the first that will fall due."

　　"Do you wish for time to pay?"

　　"A delay would save my honor, and consequently my life."

　　"How long a delay do you wish for?" -- Morrel reflected."Two months," said he.

　　"I will give you three," replied the stranger.

　　"But," asked Morrel, "will the house of Thomson & Frenchconsent?"

　　"Oh, I take everything on myself. To-day is the 5th ofJune."

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, renew these bills up to the 5th of September; and onthe 5th of September at eleven o'clock (the hand of theclock pointed to eleven), I shall come to receive themoney."

　　"I shall expect you," returned Morrel; "and I will pay you-- or I shall he dead." These last words were uttered in solow a tone that the stranger could not hear them. The billswere renewed, the old ones destroyed, and the poorship-owner found himself with three months before him tocollect his resources. The Englishman received his thankswith the phlegm peculiar to his nation; and Morrel,overwhelming him with grateful blessings, conducted him tothe staircase. The stranger met Julie on the stairs; shepretended to be descending, but in reality she was waitingfor him. "Oh, sir" -- said she, clasping her hands.

　　"Mademoiselle," said the stranger, "one day you will receivea letter signed `Sinbad the Sailor.' Do exactly what theletter bids you, however strange it may appear."

　　"Yes, sir," returned Julie.

　　"Do you promise?"

　　"I swear to you I will."

　　"It is well. Adieu, mademoiselle. Continue to be the good,sweet girl you are at present, and I have great hopes thatheaven will reward you by giving you Emmanuel for ahusband."

　　Julie uttered a faint cry, blushed like a rose, and leanedagainst the baluster. The stranger waved his hand, andcontinued to descend. In the court he found Penelon, who,with a rouleau of a hundred francs in either hand, seemedunable to make up his mind to retain them. "Come with me, myfriend," said the Englishman; "I wish to speak to you."

　　Chapter 30The Fifth of September.

　　The extension provided for by the agent of Thomson & French,at the moment when Morrel expected it least, was to the poorshipowner so decided a stroke of good fortune that he almostdared to believe that fate was at length grown weary ofwasting her spite upon him. The same day he told his wife,Emmanuel, and his daughter all that had occurred; and a rayof hope, if not of tranquillity, returned to the family.Unfortunately, however, Morrel had not only engagements withthe house of Thomson & French, who had shown themselves soconsiderate towards him; and, as he had said, in business hehad correspondents, and not friends. When he thought thematter over, he could by no means account for this generousconduct on the part of Thomson & French towards him; andcould only attribute it to some such selfish argument asthis: -- "We had better help a man who owes us nearly300,000 francs, and have those 300,000 francs at the end ofthree months than hasten his ruin, and get only six or eightper cent of our money back again." Unfortunately, whetherthrough envy or stupidity, all Morrel's correspondents didnot take this view; and some even came to a contrarydecision. The bills signed by Morrel were presented at hisoffice with scrupulous exactitude, and, thanks to the delaygranted by the Englishman, were paid by Cocles with equalpunctuality. Cocles thus remained in his accustomedtranquillity. It was Morrel alone who remembered with alarm,that if he had to repay on the 15th the 50,000 francs of M.de Boville, and on the 30th the 32,500 francs of bills, forwhich, as well as the debt due to the inspector of prisons,he had time granted, he must be a ruined man.

　　The opinion of all the commercial men was that, under thereverses which had successively weighed down Morrel, it wasimpossible for him to remain solvent. Great, therefore, wasthe astonishment when at the end of the month, he cancelledall his obligations with his usual punctuality. Stillconfidence was not restored to all minds, and the generalopinion was that the complete ruin of the unfortunateshipowner had been postponed only until the end of themonth. The month passed, and Morrel made extraordinaryefforts to get in all his resources. Formerly his paper, atany date, was taken with confidence, and was even inrequest. Morrel now tried to negotiate bills at ninety daysonly, and none of the banks would give him credit.Fortunately, Morrel had some funds coming in on which hecould rely; and, as they reached him, he found himself in acondition to meet his engagements when the end of July came.The agent of Thomson & French had not been again seen atMarseilles; the day after, or two days after his visit toMorrel, he had disappeared; and as in that city he had hadno intercourse but with the mayor, the inspector of prisons,and M. Morrel, his departure left no trace except in thememories of these three persons. As to the sailors of thePharaon, they must have found snug berths elsewhere, forthey also had disappeared.

　　Captain Gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returnedfrom Palma. He delayed presenting himself at Morrel's, butthe owner, hearing of his arrival, went to see him. Theworthy shipowner knew, from Penelon's recital, of thecaptain's brave conduct during the storm, and tried toconsole him. He brought him also the amount of his wages,which Captain Gaumard had not dared to apply for. As hedescended the staircase, Morrel met Penelon, who was goingup. Penelon had, it would seem, made good use of his money,for he was newly clad. When he saw his employer, the worthytar seemed much embarrassed, drew on one side into thecorner of the landing-place, passed his quid from one cheekto the other, stared stupidly with his great eyes, and onlyacknowledged the squeeze of the hand which Morrel as usualgave him by a slight pressure in return. Morrel attributedPenelon's embarrassment to the elegance of his attire; itwas evident the good fellow had not gone to such an expenseon his own account; he was, no doubt, engaged on board someother vessel, and thus his bashfulness arose from the factof his not having, if we may so express ourselves, wornmourning for the Pharaon longer. Perhaps he had come to tellCaptain Gaumard of his good luck, and to offer himemployment from his new master. "Worthy fellows!" saidMorrel, as he went away, "may your new master love you as Iloved you, and be more fortunate than I have been!"

　　August rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of Morrelto renew his credit or revive the old. On the 20th of Augustit was known at Marseilles that he had left town in themailcoach, and then it was said that the bills would go toprotest at the end of the month, and that Morrel had goneaway and left his chief clerk Emmanuel, and his cashierCocles, to meet the creditors. But, contrary to allexpectation, when the 31st of August came, the house openedas usual, and Cocles appeared behind the grating of thecounter, examined all bills presented with the usualscrutiny, and, from first to last, paid all with the usualprecision. There came in, moreover, two drafts which M.Morrel had fully anticipated, and which Cocles paid aspunctually as the bills which the shipowner had accepted.All this was incomprehensible, and then, with the tenacitypeculiar to prophets of bad news, the failure was put offuntil the end of September. On the 1st, Morrel returned; hewas awaited by his family with extreme anxiety, for fromthis journey to Paris they hoped great things. Morrel hadthought of Danglars, who was now immensely rich, and hadlain under great obligations to Morrel in former days, sinceto him it was owing that Danglars entered the service of theSpanish banker, with whom he had laid the foundations of hisvast wealth. It was said at this moment that Danglars wasworth from six to eight millions of francs, and hadunlimited credit. Danglars, then, without taking a crownfrom his pocket, could save Morrel; he had but to pass hisword for a loan, and Morrel was saved. Morrel had longthought of Danglars, but had kept away from some instinctivemotive, and had delayed as long as possible availing himselfof this last resource. And Morrel was right, for he returnedhome crushed by the humiliation of a refusal. Yet, on hisarrival, Morrel did not utter a complaint, or say one harshword. He embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressedEmmanuel's hand with friendly warmth, and then going to hisprivate room on the second floor had sent for Cocles."Then," said the two women to Emmanuel, "we are indeedruined."

　　It was agreed in a brief council held among them, that Julieshould write to her brother, who was in garrison at Nimes,to come to them as speedily as possible. The poor women feltinstinctively that they required all their strength tosupport the blow that impended. Besides, Maximilian Morrel,though hardly two and twenty, had great influence over hisfather. He was a strong-minded, upright young man. At thetime when he decided on his profession his father had nodesire to choose for him, but had consulted youngMaximilian's taste. He had at once declared for a militarylife, and had in consequence studied hard, passedbrilliantly through the Polytechnic School, and left it assub-lieutenant of the 53d of the line. For a year he hadheld this rank, and expected promotion on the first vacancy.In his regiment Maximilian Morrel was noted for his rigidobservance, not only of the obligations imposed on asoldier, but also of the duties of a man; and he thus gainedthe name of "the stoic." We need hardly say that many ofthose who gave him this epithet repeated it because they hadheard it, and did not even know what it meant. This was theyoung man whom his mother and sister called to their aid tosustain them under the serious trial which they felt theywould soon have to endure. They had not mistaken the gravityof this event, for the moment after Morrel had entered hisprivate office with Cocles, Julie saw the latter leave itpale, trembling, and his features betraying the utmostconsternation. She would have questioned him as he passed byher, but the worthy creature hastened down the staircasewith unusual precipitation, and only raised his hands toheaven and exclaimed, "Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, whata dreadful misfortune! Who could ever have believed it!" Amoment afterwards Julie saw him go up-stairs carrying two orthree heavy ledgers, a portfolio, and a bag of money.

　　Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, andcounted the money. All his funds amounted to 6,000, or 8,000francs, his bills receivable up to the 5th to 4,000 or5,000, which, making the best of everything, gave him 14,000francs to meet debts amounting to 287,500 francs. He had noteven the means for making a possible settlement on account.However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he appearedvery calm. This calmness was more alarming to the two womenthan the deepest dejection would have been. After dinnerMorrel usually went out and used to take his coffee at thePhocaean club, and read the Semaphore; this day he did notleave the house, but returned to his office.

　　As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered. For part ofthe day he went into the court-yard, seated himself on astone with his head bare and exposed to the blazing sun.Emmanuel tried to comfort the women, but his eloquencefaltered. The young man was too well acquainted with thebusiness of the house, not to feel that a great catastrophehung over the Morrel family. Night came, the two women hadwatched, hoping that when he left his room Morrel would cometo them, but they heard him pass before their door, andtrying to conceal the noise of his footsteps. They listened;he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened the doorinside. Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half anhour after Julie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes,and went stealthily along the passage, to see through thekeyhole what her husband was doing. In the passage she saw aretreating shadow; it was Julie, who, uneasy herself, hadanticipated her mother. The young lady went towards MadameMorrel.

　　"He is writing," she said. They had understood each otherwithout speaking. Madame Morrel looked again through thekeyhole, Morrel was writing; but Madame Morrel remarked,what her daughter had not observed, that her husband waswriting on stamped paper. The terrible idea that he waswriting his will flashed across her; she shuddered, and yethad not strength to utter a word. Next day M. Morrel seemedas calm as ever, went into his office as usual, came to hisbreakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he placed hisdaughter beside him, took her head in his arms, and held herfor a long time against his bosom. In the evening, Julietold her mother, that although he was apparently so calm,she had noticed that her father's heart beat violently. Thenext two days passed in much the same way. On the evening ofthe 4th of September, M. Morrel asked his daughter for thekey of his study. Julie trembled at this request, whichseemed to her of bad omen. Why did her father ask for thiskey which she always kept, and which was only taken from herin childhood as a punishment? The young girl looked atMorrel.

　　"What have I done wrong, father," she said, "that you shouldtake this key from me?"

　　"Nothing, my dear," replied the unhappy man, the tearsstarting to his eyes at this simple question, -- "nothing,only I want it." Julie made a pretence to feel for the key."I must have left it in my room," she said. And she wentout, but instead of going to her apartment she hastened toconsult Emmanuel. "Do not give this key to your father,"said he, "and to-morrow morning, if possible, do not quithim for a moment." She questioned Emmanuel, but he knewnothing, or would not say what he knew. During the night,between the 4th and 5th of September, Madame Morrel remainedlistening for every sound, and, until three o'clock in themorning, she heard her husband pacing the room in greatagitation. It was three o'clock when he threw himself on thebed. The mother and daughter passed the night together. Theyhad expected Maximilian since the previous evening. At eighto'clock in the morning Morrel entered their chamber. He wascalm; but the agitation of the night was legible in his paleand careworn visage. They did not dare to ask him how he hadslept. Morrel was kinder to his wife, more affectionate tohis daughter, than he had ever been. He could not ceasegazing at and kissing the sweet girl. Julie, mindful ofEmmanuel's request, was following her father when he quittedthe room, but he said to her quickly, -- "Remain with yourmother, dearest." Julie wished to accompany him. "I wish youto do so," said he.

　　This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but hesaid it in a tone of paternal kindness, and Julie did notdare to disobey. She remained at the same spot standing muteand motionless. An instant afterwards the door opened, shefelt two arms encircle her, and a mouth pressed herforehead. She looked up and uttered an exclamation of joy.

　　"Maximilian, my dearest brother!" she cried. At these wordsMadame Morrel rose, and threw herself into her son's arms."Mother," said the young man, looking alternately at MadameMorrel and her daughter, "what has occurred -- what hashappened? Your letter has frightened me, and I have comehither with all speed."

　　"Julie," said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young man,"go and tell your father that Maximilian has just arrived."The young lady rushed out of the apartment, but on the firststep of the staircase she found a man holding a letter inhis hand.

　　"Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?" inquired the man,with a strong Italian accent.

　　"Yes, sir," replied Julie with hesitation; "what is yourpleasure? I do not know you."

　　"Read this letter," he said, handing it to her. Juliehesitated. "It concerns the best interests of your father,"said the messenger.

　　The young girl hastily took the letter from him. She openedit quickly and read: --

　　"Go this moment to the Allees de Meillan, enter the houseNo. 15, ask the porter for the key of the room on the fifthfloor, enter the apartment, take from the corner of themantelpiece a purse netted in red silk, and give it to yourfather. It is important that he should receive it beforeeleven o'clock. You promised to obey me implicitly. Rememberyour oath.

　　"Sinbad the Sailor."

　　The young girl uttered a joyful cry, raised her eyes, lookedround to question the messenger, but he had disappeared. Shecast her eyes again over the note to peruse it a secondtime, and saw there was a postscript. She read: --

　　"It is important that you should fulfil this mission inperson and alone. If you go accompanied by any other person,or should any one else go in your place, the porter willreply that he does not know anything about it."

　　This postscript decreased greatly the young girl'shappiness. Was there nothing to fear? was there not somesnare laid for her? Her innocence had kept her in ignoranceof the dangers that might assail a young girl of her age.But there is no need to know danger in order to fear it;indeed, it may be observed, that it is usually unknownperils that inspire the greatest terror.

　　Julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel. Yet, througha singular impulse, it was neither to her mother nor herbrother that she applied, but to Emmanuel. She hastened downand told him what had occurred on the day when the agent ofThomson & French had come to her father's, related the sceneon the staircase, repeated the promise she had made, andshowed him the letter. "You must go, then, mademoiselle,"said Emmanuel.

　　"Go there?" murmured Julie.

　　"Yes; I will accompany you."

　　"But did you not read that I must be alone?" said Julie.

　　"And you shall be alone," replied the young man. "I willawait you at the corner of the Rue de Musee, and if you areso long absent as to make me uneasy, I will hasten to rejoinyou, and woe to him of whom you shall have cause to complainto me!"

　　"Then, Emmanuel?" said the young girl with hesitation, "itis your opinion that I should obey this invitation?"

　　"Yes. Did not the messenger say your father's safetydepended upon it?"

　　"But what danger threatens him, then, Emmanuel?" she asked.

　　Emmanuel hesitated a moment, but his desire to make Juliedecide immediately made him reply.

　　"Listen," he said; "to-day is the 5th of September, is itnot?"

　　"Yes."

　　"To-day, then, at eleven o'clock, your father has nearlythree hundred thousand francs to pay?"

　　"Yes, we know that."

　　"Well, then," continued Emmanuel, "we have not fifteenthousand francs in the house."

　　"What will happen then?"

　　"Why, if to-day before eleven o'clock your father has notfound someone who will come to his aid, he will be compelledat twelve o'clock to declare himself a bankrupt."

　　"Oh, come, then, come!" cried she, hastening away with theyoung man. During this time, Madame Morrel had told her soneverything. The young man knew quite well that, after thesuccession of misfortunes which had befallen his father,great changes had taken place in the style of living andhousekeeping; but he did not know that matters had reachedsuch a point. He was thunderstruck. Then, rushing hastilyout of the apartment, he ran up-stairs, expecting to findhis father in his study, but he rapped there in vain.

　　While he was yet at the door of the study he heard thebedroom door open, turned, and saw his father. Instead ofgoing direct to his study, M. Morrel had returned to hisbed-chamber, which he was only this moment quitting. Morreluttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of whosearrival he was ignorant. He remained motionless on the spot,pressing with his left hand something he had concealed underhis coat. Maximilian sprang down the staircase, and threwhis arms round his father's neck; but suddenly he recoiled,and placed his right hand on Morrel's breast. "Father," heexclaimed, turning pale as death, "what are you going to dowith that brace of pistols under your coat?"

　　"Oh, this is what I feared!" said Morrel.

　　"Father, father, in heaven's name," exclaimed the young man,"what are these weapons for?"

　　"Maximilian," replied Morrel, looking fixedly at his son,"you are a man, and a man of honor. Come, and I will explainto you."

　　And with a firm step Morrel went up to his study, whileMaximilian followed him, trembling as he went. Morrel openedthe door, and closed it behind his son; then, crossing theanteroom, went to his desk on which he placed the pistols,and pointed with his finger to an open ledger. In thisledger was made out an exact balance-sheet of his affair's.Morrel had to pay, within half an hour, 287,500 francs. Allhe possessed was 15,257 francs. "Read!" said Morrel.

　　The young man was overwhelmed as he read. Morrel said not aword. What could he say? What need he add to such adesperate proof in figures? "And have you done all that ispossible, father, to meet this disastrous result?" asked theyoung man, after a moment's pause. "I have," replied Morrel.

　　"You have no money coming in on which you can rely?"

　　"None."

　　"You have exhausted every resource?"

　　"All."

　　"And in half an hour," said Maximilian in a gloomy voice,"our name is dishonored!"

　　"Blood washes out dishonor," said Morrel.

　　"You are right, father; I understand you." Then extendinghis hand towards one of the pistols, he said, "There is onefor you and one for me -- thanks!" Morrel caught his hand."Your mother -- your sister! Who will support them?" Ashudder ran through the young man's frame. "Father," hesaid, "do you reflect that you are bidding me to live?"

　　"Yes, I do so bid you," answered Morrel, "it is your duty.You have a calm, strong mind, Maximilian. Maximilian, youare no ordinary man. I make no requests or commands; I onlyask you to examine my position as if it were your own, andthen judge for yourself."

　　The young man reflected for a moment, then an expression ofsublime resignation appeared in his eyes, and with a slowand sad gesture he took off his two epaulets, the insigniaof his rank. "Be it so, then, my father," he said, extendinghis hand to Morrel, "die in peace, my father; I will live."Morrel was about to cast himself on his knees before hisson, but Maximilian caught him in his arms, and those twonoble hearts were pressed against each other for a moment."You know it is not my fault," said Morrel. Maximiliansmiled. "I know, father, you are the most honorable man Ihave ever known."

　　"Good, my son. And now there is no more to be said; go andrejoin your mother and sister."

　　"My father," said the young man, bending his knee, "blessme!" Morrel took the head of his son between his two hands,drew him forward, and kissing his forehead several timessaid, "Oh, yes, yes, I bless you in my own name, and in thename of three generations of irreproachable men, who saythrough me, `The edifice which misfortune has destroyed,providence may build up again.' On seeing me die such adeath, the most inexorable will have pity on you. To you,perhaps, they will accord the time they have refused to me.Then do your best to keep our name free from dishonor. Go towork, labor, young man, struggle ardently and courageously;live, yourself, your mother and sister, with the most rigideconomy, so that from day to day the property of those whomI leave in your hands may augment and fructify. Reflect howglorious a day it will be, how grand, how solemn, that dayof complete restoration, on which you will say in this veryoffice, `My father died because he could not do what I havethis day done; but he died calmly and peaceably, because indying he knew what I should do.'"

　　"My father, my father!" cried the young man, "why should younot live?"

　　"If I live, all would be changed; if I live, interest wouldbe converted into doubt, pity into hostility; if I live I amonly a man who his broken his word, failed in hisengagements -- in fact, only a bankrupt. If, on thecontrary, I die, remember, Maximilian, my corpse is that ofan honest but unfortunate man. Living, my best friends wouldavoid my house; dead, all Marseilles will follow me in tearsto my last home. Living, you would feel shame at my name;dead, you may raise your head and say, `I am the son of himyou killed, because, for the first time, he has beencompelled to break his word.'"

　　The young man uttered a groan, but appeared resigned.

　　"And now," said Morrel, "leave me alone, and endeavor tokeep your mother and sister away."

　　"Will you not see my sister once more?" asked Maximilian. Alast but final hope was concealed by the young man in theeffect of this interview, and therefore he had suggested it.Morrel shook his head. "I saw her this morning, and bade heradieu."

　　"Have you no particular commands to leave with me, myfather?" inquired Maximilian in a faltering voice.

　　"Yes; my son, and a sacred command."

　　"Say it, my father."

　　"The house of Thomson & French is the only one who, fromhumanity, or, it may be, selfishness -- it is not for me toread men's hearts -- has had any pity for me. Its agent, whowill in ten minutes present himself to receive the amount ofa bill of 287,500 francs, I will not say granted, butoffered me three months. Let this house be the first repaid,my son, and respect this man."

　　"Father, I will," said Maximilian.

　　"And now, once more, adieu," said Morrel. "Go, leave me; Iwould be alone. You will find my will in the secretary in mybedroom."

　　The young man remained standing and motionless, having butthe force of will and not the power of execution.

　　"Hear me, Maximilian," said his father. "Suppose I was asoldier like you, and ordered to carry a certain redoubt,and you knew I must be killed in the assault, would you notsay to me, as you said just now, `Go, father; for you aredishonored by delay, and death is preferable to shame!'"

　　"Yes, yes," said the young man, "yes;" and once againembracing his father with convulsive pressure, he said, "Beit so, my father."

　　And he rushed out of the study. When his son had left him,Morrel remained an instant standing with his eyes fixed onthe door; then putting forth his arm, he pulled the bell.After a moment's interval, Cocles appeared.

　　It was no longer the same man -- the fearful revelations ofthe three last days had crushed him. This thought -- thehouse of Morrel is about to stop payment -- bent him to theearth more than twenty years would otherwise have done.

　　"My worthy Cocles," said Morrel in a tone impossible todescribe, "do you remain in the ante-chamber. When thegentleman who came three months ago -- the agent of Thomson& French -- arrives, announce his arrival to me." Coclesmade no reply; he made a sign with his head, went into theanteroom, and seated himself. Morrel fell back in his chair,his eyes fixed on the clock; there were seven minutes left,that was all. The hand moved on with incredible rapidity, heseemed to see its motion.

　　What passed in the mind of this man at the supreme moment ofhis agony cannot be told in words. He was stillcomparatively young, he was surrounded by the loving care ofa devoted family, but he had convinced himself by a courseof reasoning, illogical perhaps, yet certainly plausible,that he must separate himself from all he held dear in theworld, even life itself. To form the slightest idea of hisfeelings, one must have seen his face with its expression ofenforced resignation and its tear-moistened eyes raised toheaven. The minute hand moved on. The pistols were loaded;he stretched forth his hand, took one up, and murmured hisdaughter's name. Then he laid it down seized his pen, andwrote a few words. It seemed to him as if he had not taken asufficient farewell of his beloved daughter. Then he turnedagain to the clock, counting time now not by minutes, but byseconds. He took up the deadly weapon again, his lips partedand his eyes fixed on the clock, and then shuddered at theclick of the trigger as he cocked the pistol. At this momentof mortal anguish the cold sweat came forth upon his brow, apang stronger than death clutched at his heart-strings. Heheard the door of the staircase creak on its hinges -- theclock gave its warning to strike eleven -- the door of hisstudy opened; Morrel did not turn round -- he expected thesewords of Cocles, "The agent of Thomson & French."

　　He placed the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth.Suddenly he heard a cry -- it was his daughter's voice. Heturned and saw Julie. The pistol fell from his hands. "Myfather!" cried the young girl, out of breath, and half deadwith joy -- "saved, you are saved!" And she threw herselfinto his arms, holding in her extended hand a red, nettedsilk purse.

　　"Saved, my child!" said Morrel; "what do you mean?"

　　"Yes, saved -- saved! See, see!" said the young girl.

　　Morrel took the purse, and started as he did so, for a vagueremembrance reminded him that it once belonged to himself.At one end was the receipted bill for the 287,000 francs,and at the other was a diamond as large as a hazel-nut, withthese words on a small slip of parchment: -- Julie's Dowry.

　　Morrel passed his hand over his brow; it seemed to him adream. At this moment the clock struck eleven. He felt as ifeach stroke of the hammer fell upon his heart. "Explain, mychild," he said, "Explain, my child," he said, "explain --where did you find this purse?"

　　"In a house in the Allees de Meillan, No. 15, on the cornerof a mantelpiece in a small room on the fifth floor."

　　"But," cried Morrel, "this purse is not yours!" Julie handedto her father the letter she had received in the morning.

　　"And did you go alone?" asked Morrel, after he had read it.

　　"Emmanuel accompanied me, father. He was to have waited forme at the corner of the Rue de Musee, but, strange to say,he was not there when I returned."

　　"Monsieur Morrel!" exclaimed a voice on the stairs. --"Monsieur Morrel!"

　　"It is his voice!" said Julie. At this moment Emmanuelentered, his countenance full of animation and joy. "ThePharaon!" he cried; "the Pharaon!"

　　"What -- what -- the Pharaon! Are you mad, Emmanuel? Youknow the vessel is lost."

　　"The Pharaon, sir -- they signal the Pharaon! The Pharaon isentering the harbor!" Morrel fell back in his chair, hisstrength was failing him; his understanding weakened by suchevents, refused to comprehend such incredible, unheard-of,fabulous facts. But his son came in. "Father," criedMaximilian, "how could you say the Pharaon was lost? Thelookout has signalled her, and they say she is now cominginto port."

　　"My dear friends," said Morrel, "if this be so, it must be amiracle of heaven! Impossible, impossible!"

　　But what was real and not less incredible was the purse heheld in his hand, the acceptance receipted -- the splendiddiamond.

　　"Ah, sir," exclaimed Cocles, "what can it mean? -- thePharaon?"

　　"Come, dear ones," said Morrel, rising from his seat, "letus go and see, and heaven have pity upon us if it be falseintelligence!" They all went out, and on the stairs metMadame Morrel, who had been afraid to go up into the study.In a moment they were at the Cannebiere. There was a crowdon the pier. All the crowd gave way before Morrel. "ThePharaon, the Pharaon!" said every voice.

　　And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean,was a ship bearing on her stern these words, printed inwhite letters, "The Pharaon, Morrel & Son, of Marseilles."She was the exact duplicate of the other Pharaon, andloaded, as that had been, with cochineal and indigo. Shecast anchor, clued up sails, and on the deck was CaptainGaumard giving orders, and good old Penelon making signalsto M. Morrel. To doubt any longer was impossible; there wasthe evidence of the senses, and ten thousand persons whocame to corroborate the testimony. As Morrel and his sonembraced on the pier-head, in the presence and amid theapplause of the whole city witnessing this event, a man,with his face half-covered by a black beard, and who,concealed behind the sentry-box, watched the scene withdelight, uttered these words in a low tone: "Be happy, nobleheart, be blessed for all the good thou hast done and wiltdo hereafter, and let my gratitude remain in obscurity likeyour good deeds."

　　And with a smile expressive of supreme content, he left hishiding-place, and without being observed, descended one ofthe flights of steps provided for debarkation, and hailingthree times, shouted "Jacopo, Jacopo, Jacopo!" Then a launchcame to shore, took him on board, and conveyed him to ayacht splendidly fitted up, on whose deck he sprung with theactivity of a sailor; thence he once again looked towardsMorrel, who, weeping with joy, was shaking hands mostcordially with all the crowd around him, and thanking with alook the unknown benefactor whom he seemed to be seeking inthe skies. "And now," said the unknown, "farewell kindness,humanity, and gratitude! Farewell to all the feelings thatexpand the heart! I have been heaven's substitute torecompense the good -- now the god of vengeance yields to mehis power to punish the wicked!" At these words he gave asignal, and, as if only awaiting this signal, the yachtinstantly put out to sea.

　　Chapter 31Italy: Sinbad the Sailor.

　　Towards the beginning of the year 1838, two young menbelonging to the first society of Paris, the Vicomte Albertde Morcerf and the Baron Franz d'Epinay, were at Florence.They had agreed to see the Carnival at Rome that year, andthat Franz, who for the last three or four years hadinhabited Italy, should act as cicerone to Albert. As it isno inconsiderable affair to spend the Carnival at Rome,especially when you have no great desire to sleep on thePiazza del Popolo, or the Campo Vaccino, they wrote toSignor Pastrini, the proprietor of the Hotel de Londres,Piazza di Spagna, to reserve comfortable apartments forthem. Signor Pastrini replied that he had only two rooms anda parlor on the third floor, which he offered at the lowcharge of a louis per diem. They accepted his offer; butwishing to make the best use of the time that was left,Albert started for Naples. As for Franz, he remained atFlorence, and after having passed a few days in exploringthe paradise of the Cascine, and spending two or threeevenings at the houses of the Florentine nobility, he took afancy into his head (having already visited Corsica, thecradle of Bonaparte) to visit Elba, the waiting-place ofNapoleon.

　　One evening he cast off the painter of a sailboat from theiron ring that secured it to the dock at Leghorn, wrappedhimself in his coat and lay down, and said to the crew, --"To the Island of Elba!" The boat shot out of the harborlike a bird and the next morning Franz disembarked atPorto-Ferrajo. He traversed the island, after havingfollowed the traces which the footsteps of the giant haveleft, and re-embarked for Marciana. Two hours after he againlanded at Pianosa, where he was assured that red partridgesabounded. The sport was bad; Franz only succeeded in killinga few partridges, and, like every unsuccessful sportsman, hereturned to the boat very much out of temper. "Ah, if yourexcellency chose," said the captain, "you might have capitalsport."

　　"Where?"

　　"Do you see that island?" continued the captain, pointing toa conical pile rising from the indigo sea.

　　"Well, what is this island?"

　　"The Island of Monte Cristo."

　　"But I have no permission to shoot over this island."

　　"Your excellency does not require a permit, for the islandis uninhabited."

　　"Ah, indeed!" said the young man. "A desert island in themidst of the Mediterranean must be a curiosity."

　　"It is very natural; this island is a mass of rocks, anddoes not contain an acre of land capable of cultivation."

　　"To whom does this island belong?"

　　"To Tuscany."

　　"What game shall I find there!"

　　"Thousands of wild goats."

　　"Who live upon the stones, I suppose," said Franz with anincredulous smile.

　　"No, but by browsing the shrubs and trees that grow out ofthe crevices of the rocks."

　　"Where can I sleep?"

　　"On shore in the grottos, or on board in your cloak;besides, if your excellency pleases, we can leave as soon asyou like -- we can sail as well by night as by day, and ifthe wind drops we can use our oars."

　　As Franz had sufficient time, and his apartments at Romewere not yet available, he accepted the proposition. Uponhis answer in the affirmative, the sailors exchanged a fewwords together in a low tone. "Well," asked he, "what now?Is there any difficulty in the way?"

　　"No." replied the captain, "but we must warn your excellencythat the island is an infected port."

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"Monte Cristo although uninhabited, yet serves occasionallyas a refuge for the smugglers and pirates who come fromCorsica, Sardinia, and Africa, and if it becomes known thatwe have been there, we shall have to perform quarantine forsix days on our return to Leghorn."

　　"The deuce! That puts a different face on the matter. Sixdays! Why, that's as long as the Almighty took to make theworld! Too long a wait -- too long."

　　"But who will say your excellency has been to Monte Cristo?"

　　"Oh, I shall not," cried Franz.

　　"Nor I, nor I," chorused the sailors.

　　"Then steer for Monte Cristo."

　　The captain gave his orders, the helm was put up, and theboat was soon sailing in the direction of the island. Franzwaited until all was in order, and when the sail was filled,and the four sailors had taken their places -- threeforward, and one at the helm -- he resumed the conversation."Gaetano," said he to the captain, "you tell me Monte Cristoserves as a refuge for pirates, who are, it seems to me, avery different kind of game from the goats."

　　"Yes, your excellency, and it is true."

　　"I knew there were smugglers, but I thought that since thecapture of Algiers, and the destruction of the regency,pirates existed only in the romances of Cooper and CaptainMarryat."

　　"Your excellency is mistaken; there are pirates, like thebandits who were believed to have been exterminated by PopeLeo XII., and who yet, every day, rob travellers at thegates of Rome. Has not your excellency heard that the Frenchcharge d'affaires was robbed six months ago within fivehundred paces of Velletri?"

　　"Oh, yes, I heard that."

　　"Well, then, if, like us, your excellency lived at Leghorn,you would hear, from time to time, that a little merchantvessel, or an English yacht that was expected at Bastia, atPorto-Ferrajo, or at Civita Vecchia, has not arrived; no oneknows what has become of it, but, doubtless, it has struckon a rock and foundered. Now this rock it has met has been along and narrow boat, manned by six or eight men, who havesurprised and plundered it, some dark and stormy night, nearsome desert and gloomy island, as bandits plunder a carriagein the recesses of a forest."

　　"But," asked Franz, who lay wrapped in his cloak at thebottom of the boat, "why do not those who have beenplundered complain to the French, Sardinian, or Tuscangovernments?"

　　"Why?" said Gaetano with a smile.

　　"Yes, why?"

　　"Because, in the first place, they transfer from the vesselto their own boat whatever they think worth taking, thenthey bind the crew hand and foot, they attach to every one'sneck a four and twenty pound ball, a large hole is choppedin the vessel's bottom, and then they leave her. At the endof ten minutes the vessel begins to roll heavily and settledown. First one gun'l goes under, then the other. Then theylift and sink again, and both go under at once. All at oncethere's a noise like a cannon -- that's the air blowing upthe deck. Soon the water rushes out of the scupper-holeslike a whale spouting, the vessel gives a last groan, spinsround and round, and disappears, forming a vast whirlpool inthe ocean, and then all is over, so that in five minutesnothing but the eye of God can see the vessel where she liesat the bottom of the sea. Do you understand now," said thecaptain, "why no complaints are made to the government, andwhy the vessel never reaches port?"

　　It is probable that if Gaetano had related this previous toproposing the expedition, Franz would have hesitated, butnow that they had started, he thought it would be cowardlyto draw back. He was one of those men who do not rashlycourt danger, but if danger presents itself, combat it withthe most unalterable coolness. Calm and resolute, he treatedany peril as he would an adversary in a duel, -- calculatedits probable method of approach; retreated, if at all, as apoint of strategy and not from cowardice; was quick to seean opening for attack, and won victory at a single thrust."Bah!" said he, "I have travelled through Sicily andCalabria -- I have sailed two months in the Archipelago, andyet I never saw even the shadow of a bandit or a pirate."

　　"I did not tell your excellency this to deter you from yourproject," replied Gaetano, "but you questioned me, and Ihave answered; that's all."

　　"Yes, and your conversation is most interesting; and as Iwish to enjoy it as long as possible, steer for MonteCristo."

　　The wind blew strongly, the boat made six or seven knots anhour, and they were rapidly reaching the end of theirvoyage. As they drew near the island seemed to lift from thesea, and the air was so clear that they could alreadydistinguish the rocks heaped on one another, like cannonballs in an arsenal, with green bushes and trees growing inthe crevices. As for the sailors, although they appearedperfectly tranquil yet it was evident that they were on thealert, and that they carefully watched the glassy surfaceover which they were sailing, and on which a fewfishing-boats, with their white sails, were alone visible.They were within fifteen miles of Monte Cristo when the sunbegan to set behind Corsica, whose mountains appearedagainst the sky, showing their rugged peaks in bold relief;this mass of rock, like the giant Adamastor, rose deadahead, a formidable barrier, and intercepting the light thatgilded its massive peaks so that the voyagers were inshadow. Little by little the shadow rose higher and seemedto drive before it the last rays of the expiring day; atlast the reflection rested on the summit of the mountain,where it paused an instant, like the fiery crest of avolcano, then gloom gradually covered the summit as it hadcovered the base, and the island now only appeared to be agray mountain that grew continually darker; half an hourafter, the night was quite dark.

　　Fortunately, the mariners were used to these latitudes, andknew every rock in the Tuscan Archipelago; for in the midstof this obscurity Franz was not without uneasiness --Corsica had long since disappeared, and Monte Cristo itselfwas invisible; but the sailors seemed, like the lynx, to seein the dark, and the pilot who steered did not evince theslightest hesitation. An hour had passed since the sun hadset, when Franz fancied he saw, at a quarter of a mile tothe left, a dark mass, but he could not precisely make outwhat it was, and fearing to excite the mirth of the sailorsby mistaking a floating cloud for land, he remained silent;suddenly a great light appeared on the strand; land mightresemble a cloud, but the fire was not a meteor. "What isthis light?" asked he.

　　"Hush!" said the captain; "it is a fire."

　　"But you told me the island was uninhabited?"

　　"l said there were no fixed habitations on it, but I saidalso that it served sometimes as a harbor for smugglers."

　　"And for pirates?"

　　"And for pirates," returned Gaetano, repeating Franz'swords. "It is for that reason I have given orders to passthe island, for, as you see, the fire is behind us."

　　"But this fire?" continued Franz. "It seems to me ratherreassuring than otherwise; men who did not wish to be seenwould not light a fire."

　　"Oh, that goes for nothing," said Gaetano. "If you can guessthe position of the island in the darkness, you will seethat the fire cannot be seen from the side or from Pianosa,but only from the sea."

　　"You think, then, this fire indicates the presence ofunpleasant neighbors?"

　　"That is what we must find out," returned Gaetano, fixinghis eyes on this terrestrial star.

　　"How can you find out?"

　　"You shall see." Gaetano consulted with his companions, andafter five minutes' discussion a manoeuvre was executedwhich caused the vessel to tack about, they returned the waythey had come, and in a few minutes the fire disappeared,hidden by an elevation of the land. The pilot again changedthe course of the boat, which rapidly approached the island,and was soon within fifty paces of it. Gaetano lowered thesail, and the boat came to rest. All this was done insilence, and from the moment that their course was changednot a word was spoken.

　　Gaetano, who had proposed the expedition, had taken all theresponsibility on himself; the four sailors fixed their eyeson him, while they got out their oars and held themselves inreadiness to row away, which, thanks to the darkness, wouldnot be difficult. As for Franz, he examined his arms withthe utmost coolness; he had two double-barrelled guns and arifle; he loaded them, looked at the priming, and waitedquietly. During this time the captain had thrown off hisvest and shirt, and secured his trousers round his waist;his feet were naked, so he had no shoes and stockings totake off; after these preparations he placed his finger onhis lips, and lowering himself noiselessly into the sea,swam towards the shore with such precaution that it wasimpossible to hear the slightest sound; he could only betraced by the phosphorescent line in his wake. This tracksoon disappeared; it was evident that he had touched theshore. Every one on board remained motionless for half anhour, when the same luminous track was again observed, andthe swimmer was soon on board. "Well?" exclaimed Franz andthe sailors in unison.

　　"They are Spanish smugglers," said he; "they have with themtwo Corsican bandits."

　　"And what are these Corsican bandits doing here with Spanishsmugglers?"

　　"Alas," returned the captain with an accent of the mostprofound pity, "we ought always to help one another. Veryoften the bandits are hard pressed by gendarmes orcarbineers; well, they see a vessel, and good fellows likeus on board, they come and demand hospitality of us; youcan't refuse help to a poor hunted devil; we receive them,and for greater security we stand out to sea. This costs usnothing, and saves the life, or at least the liberty, of afellow-creature, who on the first occasion returns theservice by pointing out some safe spot where we can land ourgoods without interruption."

　　"Ah!" said Franz, "then you are a smuggler occasionally,Gaetano?"

　　"Your excellency, we must live somehow," returned the other,smiling impenetrably.

　　"Then you know the men who are now on Monte Cristo?"

　　"Oh, yes, we sailors are like freemasons, and recognize eachother by signs."

　　"And do you think we have nothing to fear if we land?"

　　"Nothing at all; smugglers are not thieves."

　　"But these two Corsican bandits?" said Franz, calculatingthe chances of peril.

　　"It is not their fault that they are bandits, but that ofthe authorities."

　　"How so?"

　　"Because they are pursued for having made a stiff, as if itwas not in a Corsican's nature to revenge himself."

　　"What do you mean by having made a stiff? -- havingassassinated a man?" said Franz, continuing hisinvestigation.

　　"I mean that they have killed an enemy, which is a verydifferent thing," returned the captain.

　　"Well," said the young man, "let us demand hospitality ofthese smugglers and bandits. Do you think they will grantit?"

　　"Without doubt."

　　"How many are they?"

　　"Four, and the two bandits make six."

　　"Just our number, so that if they prove troublesome, weshall be able to hold them in check; so, for the last time,steer to Monte Cristo."

　　"Yes, but your excellency will permit us to take all dueprecautions."

　　"By all means, be as wise as Nestor and as prudent asUlysses; I do more than permit, I exhort you."

　　"Silence, then!" said Gaetano.

　　Every one obeyed. For a man who, like Franz, viewed hisposition in its true light, it was a grave one. He was alonein the darkness with sailors whom he did not know, and whohad no reason to be devoted to him; who knew that he hadseveral thousand francs in his belt, and who had oftenexamined his weapons, -- which were very beautiful, -- ifnot with envy, at least with curiosity. On the other hand,he was about to land, without any other escort than thesemen, on an island which had, indeed, a very religious name,but which did not seem to Franz likely to afford him muchhospitality, thanks to the smugglers and bandits. Thehistory of the scuttled vessels, which had appearedimprobable during the day, seemed very probable at night;placed as he was between two possible sources of danger, hekept his eye on the crew, and his gun in his hand. Thesailors had again hoisted sail, and the vessel was once morecleaving the waves. Through the darkness Franz, whose eyeswere now more accustomed to it, could see the looming shorealong which the boat was sailing, and then, as they roundeda rocky point, he saw the fire more brilliant than ever, andabout it five or six persons seated. The blaze illumined thesea for a hundred paces around. Gaetano skirted the light,carefully keeping the boat in the shadow; then, when theywere opposite the fire, he steered to the centre of thecircle, singing a fishing song, of which his companions sungthe chorus. At the first words of the song the men seatedround the fire arose and approached the landing-place, theireyes fixed on the boat, evidently seeking to know who thenew-comers were and what were their intentions. They soonappeared satisfied and returned (with the exception of one,who remained at the shore) to their fire, at which thecarcass of a goat was roasting. When the boat was withintwenty paces of the shore, the man on the beach, who carrieda carbine, presented arms after the manner of a sentinel,and cried, "Who comes there?" in Sardinian. Franz coollycocked both barrels. Gaetano then exchanged a few words withthis man which the traveller did not understand, but whichevidently concerned him. "Will your excellency give yourname, or remain incognito?" asked the captain.

　　"My name must rest unknown, -- merely say I am a Frenchmantravelling for pleasure." As soon as Gaetano had transmittedthis answer, the sentinel gave an order to one of the menseated round the fire, who rose and disappeared among therocks. Not a word was spoken, every one seemed occupied,Franz with his disembarkment, the sailors with their sails,the smugglers with their goat; but in the midst of all thiscarelessness it was evident that they mutually observed eachother. The man who had disappeared returned suddenly on theopposite side to that by which he had left; he made a signwith his head to the sentinel, who, turning to the boat,said, "S'accommodi." The Italian s'accommodi isuntranslatable; it means at once, "Come, enter, you arewelcome; make yourself at home; you are the master." It islike that Turkish phrase of Moliere's that so astonished thebourgeois gentleman by the number of things implied in itsutterance. The sailors did not wait for a second invitation;four strokes of the oar brought them to land; Gaetano sprangto shore, exchanged a few words with the sentinel, then hiscomrades disembarked, and lastly came Franz. One of his gunswas swung over his shoulder, Gaetano had the other, and asailor held his rifle; his dress, half artist, half dandy,did not excite any suspicion, and, consequently, nodisquietude. The boat was moored to the shore, and theyadvanced a few paces to find a comfortable bivouac; but,doubtless, the spot they chose did not suit the smuggler whofilled the post of sentinel, for he cried out, "Not thatway, if you please."

　　Gaetano faltered an excuse, and advanced to the oppositeside, while two sailors kindled torches at the fire to lightthem on their way. They advanced about thirty paces, andthen stopped at a small esplanade surrounded with rocks, inwhich seats had been cut, not unlike sentry-boxes. Around inthe crevices of the rocks grew a few dwarf oaks and thickbushes of myrtles. Franz lowered a torch, and saw by themass of cinders that had accumulated that he was not thefirst to discover this retreat, which was, doubtless, one ofthe halting-places of the wandering visitors of MonteCristo. As for his suspicions, once on terra firma, oncethat he had seen the indifferent, if not friendly,appearance of his hosts, his anxiety had quite disappeared,or rather, at sight of the goat, had turned to appetite. Hementioned this to Gaetano, who replied that nothing could bemore easy than to prepare a supper when they had in theirboat, bread, wine, half a dozen partridges, and a good fireto roast them by. "Besides," added he, "if the smell oftheir roast meat tempts you, I will go and offer them two ofour birds for a slice."

　　"You are a born diplomat," returned Franz; "go and try."

　　Meanwhile the sailors had collected dried sticks andbranches with which they made a fire. Franz waitedimpatiently, inhaling the aroma of the roasted meat, whenthe captain returned with a mysterious air.

　　"Well," said Franz, "anything new? -- do they refuse?"

　　"On the contrary," returned Gaetano, "the chief, who wastold you were a young Frenchman, invites you to sup withhim."

　　"Well," observed Franz, "this chief is very polite, and Isee no objection -- the more so as I bring my share of thesupper."

　　"Oh, it is not that; he has plenty, and to spare, forsupper; but he makes one condition, and rather a peculiarone, before he will receive you at his house."

　　"His house? Has he built one here, then?"

　　"No; but he has a very comfortable one all the same, so theysay."

　　"You know this chief, then?"

　　"I have heard talk of him."

　　"Favorably or otherwise?"

　　"Both."

　　"The deuce! -- and what is this condition?"

　　"That you are blindfolded, and do not take off the bandageuntil he himself bids you." Franz looked at Gaetano, to see,if possible, what he thought of this proposal. "Ah," repliedhe, guessing Franz's thought, "I know this is a seriousmatter."

　　"What should you do in my place?"

　　"I, who have nothing to lose, -- I should go."

　　"You would accept?"

　　"Yes, were it only out of curiosity."

　　"There is something very peculiar about this chief, then?"

　　"Listen," said Gaetano, lowering his voice, "I do not knowif what they say is true" -- he stopped to see if any onewas near.

　　"What do they say?"

　　"That this chief inhabits a cavern to which the Pitti Palaceis nothing."

　　"What nonsense!" said Franz, reseating himself.

　　"It is no nonsense; it is quite true. Cama, the pilot of theSaint Ferdinand, went in once, and he came back amazed,vowing that such treasures were only to be heard of in fairytales."

　　"Do you know," observed Franz, "that with such stories youmake me think of Ali Baba's enchanted cavern?"

　　"I tell you what I have been told."

　　"Then you advise me to accept?"

　　"Oh, I don't say that; your excellency will do as youplease; I should be sorry to advise you in the matter."Franz pondered the matter for a few moments, concluded thata man so rich could not have any intention of plundering himof what little he had, and seeing only the prospect of agood supper, accepted. Gaetano departed with the reply.Franz was prudent, and wished to learn all he possibly couldconcerning his host. He turned towards the sailor, who,during this dialogue, had sat gravely plucking thepartridges with the air of a man proud of his office, andasked him how these men had landed, as no vessel of any kindwas visible.

　　"Never mind that," returned the sailor, "I know theirvessel."

　　"Is it a very beautiful vessel?"

　　"I would not wish for a better to sail round the world."

　　"Of what burden is she?"

　　"About a hundred tons; but she is built to stand anyweather. She is what the English call a yacht."

　　"Where was she built?"

　　"I know not; but my own opinion is she is a Genoese."

　　"And how did a leader of smugglers," continued Franz,"venture to build a vessel designed for such a purpose atGenoa?"

　　"I did not say that the owner was a smuggler," replied thesailor.

　　"No; but Gaetano did, I thought."

　　"Gaetano had only seen the vessel from a distance, he hadnot then spoken to any one."

　　"And if this person be not a smuggler, who is he?"

　　"A wealthy signor, who travels for his pleasure."

　　"Come," thought Franz, "he is still more mysterious, sincethe two accounts do not agree."

　　"What is his name?"

　　"If you ask him he says Sinbad the Sailor; but I doubt if itbe his real name."

　　"Sinbad the Sailor?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And where does he reside?"

　　"On the sea."

　　"What country does he come from?"

　　"I do not know."

　　"Have you ever seen him?"

　　"Sometimes."

　　"What sort of a man is he?"

　　"Your excellency will judge for yourself."

　　"Where will he receive me?"

　　"No doubt in the subterranean palace Gaetano told you of."

　　"Have you never had the curiosity, when you have landed andfound this island deserted, to seek for this enchantedpalace?"

　　"Oh, yes, more than once, but always in vain; we examinedthe grotto all over, but we never could find the slightesttrace of any opening; they say that the door is not openedby a key, but a magic word."

　　"Decidedly," muttered Franz, "this is an Arabian Nights'adventure."

　　"His excellency waits for you," said a voice, which herecognized as that of the sentinel. He was accompanied bytwo of the yacht's crew. Franz drew his handkerchief fromhis pocket, and presented it to the man who had spoken tohim. Without uttering a word, they bandaged his eyes with acare that showed their apprehensions of his committing someindiscretion. Afterwards he was made to promise that hewould not make the least attempt to raise the bandage. Hepromised. Then his two guides took his arms, and he went on,guided by them, and preceded by the sentinel. After goingabout thirty paces, he smelt the appetizing odor of the kidthat was roasting, and knew thus that he was passing thebivouac; they then led him on about fifty paces farther,evidently advancing towards that part of the shore wherethey would not allow Gaetano to go -- a refusal he could nowcomprehend. Presently, by a change in the atmosphere, heknew that they were entering a cave; after going on for afew seconds more he heard a crackling, and it seemed to himas though the atmosphere again changed, and became balmy andperfumed. At length his feet touched on a thick and softcarpet, and his guides let go their hold of him. There was amoment's silence, and then a voice, in excellent French,although, with a foreign accent, said, "Welcome, sir. I begyou will remove your bandage." It may be supposed, then,Franz did not wait for a repetition of this permission, buttook off the handkerchief, and found himself in the presenceof a man from thirty-eight to forty years of age, dressed ina Tunisian costume -- that is to say, a red cap with a longblue silk tassel, a vest of black cloth embroidered withgold, pantaloons of deep red, large and full gaiters of thesame color, embroidered with gold like the vest, and yellowslippers; he had a splendid cashmere round his waist, and asmall sharp and crooked cangiar was passed through hisgirdle. Although of a paleness that was almost livid, thisman had a remarkably handsome face; his eyes werepenetrating and sparkling; his nose, quite straight, andprojecting direct from the brow, was of the pure Greek type,while his teeth, as white as pearls, were set off toadmiration by the black mustache that encircled them.

　　His pallor was so peculiar, that it seemed to pertain to onewho had been long entombed, and who was incapable ofresuming the healthy glow and hue of life. He was notparticularly tall, but extremely well made, and, like themen of the south, had small hands and feet. But whatastonished Franz, who had treated Gaetano's description as afable, was the splendor of the apartment in which he foundhimself. The entire chamber was lined with crimson brocade,worked with flowers of gold. In a recess was a kind ofdivan, surmounted with a stand of Arabian swords in silverscabbards, and the handles resplendent with gems; from theceiling hung a lamp of Venetian glass, of beautiful shapeand color, while the feet rested on a Turkey carpet, inwhich they sunk to the instep; tapestry hung before the doorby which Franz had entered, and also in front of anotherdoor, leading into a second apartment which seemed to bebrilliantly illuminated. The host gave Franz time to recoverfrom his surprise, and, moreover, returned look for look,not even taking his eyes off him. "Sir," he said, after apause, "a thousand excuses for the precaution taken in yourintroduction hither; but as, during the greater portion ofthe year, this island is deserted, if the secret of thisabode were discovered. I should doubtless, find on my returnmy temporary retirement in a state of great disorder, whichwould be exceedingly annoying, not for the loss itoccasioned me, but because I should not have the certainty Inow possess of separating myself from all the rest ofmankind at pleasure. Let me now endeavor to make you forgetthis temporary unpleasantness, and offer you what no doubtyou did not expect to find here -- that is to say, atolerable supper and pretty comfortable beds."

　　"Ma foi, my dear sir," replied Franz, "make no apologies. Ihave always observed that they bandage people's eyes whopenetrate enchanted palaces, for instance, those of Raoul inthe `Huguenots,' and really I have nothing to complain of,for what I see makes me think of the wonders of the `ArabianNights.'"

　　"Alas, I may say with Lucullus, if I could have anticipatedthe honor of your visit, I would have prepared for it. Butsuch as is my hermitage, it is at your disposal; such as ismy supper, it is yours to share, if you will. Ali, is thesupper ready?" At this moment the tapestry moved aside, anda Nubian, black as ebony, and dressed in a plain whitetunic, made a sign to his master that all was prepared inthe dining-room. "Now," said the unknown to Franz, "I do notknow if you are of my opinion, but I think nothing is moreannoying than to remain two or three hours together withoutknowing by name or appellation how to address one another.Pray observe, that I too much respect the laws ofhospitality to ask your name or title. I only request you togive me one by which I may have the pleasure of addressingyou. As for myself, that I may put you at your ease, I tellyou that I am generally called `Sinbad the Sailor.'"

　　"And I," replied Franz, "will tell you, as I only requirehis wonderful lamp to make me precisely like Aladdin, that Isee no reason why at this moment I should not be calledAladdin. That will keep us from going away from the Eastwhither I am tempted to think I have been conveyed by somegood genius."

　　"Well, then, Signor Aladdin," replied the singularamphitryon, "you heard our repast announced, will you nowtake the trouble to enter the dining-room, your humbleservant going first to show the way?" At these words, movingaside the tapestry, Sinbad preceded his guest. Franz nowlooked upon another scene of enchantment; the table wassplendidly covered, and once convinced of this importantpoint he cast his eyes around him. The dining-room wasscarcely less striking than the room he had just left; itwas entirely of marble, with antique bas-reliefs ofpriceless value; and at the four corners of this apartment,which was oblong, were four magnificent statues, havingbaskets in their hands. These baskets contained fourpyramids of most splendid fruit; there were Sicilypine-apples, pomegranates from Malaga, oranges from theBalearic Isles, peaches from France, and dates from Tunis.The supper consisted of a roast pheasant garnished withCorsican blackbirds; a boar's ham with jelly, a quarter of akid with tartar sauce, a glorious turbot, and a giganticlobster. Between these large dishes were smaller onescontaining various dainties. The dishes were of silver, andthe plates of Japanese china.

　　Franz rubbed his eyes in order to assure himself that thiswas not a dream. Ali alone was present to wait at table, andacquitted himself so admirably, that the guest complimentedhis host thereupon. "Yes," replied he, while he did thehonors of the supper with much ease and grace -- "yes, he isa poor devil who is much devoted to me, and does all he canto prove it. He remembers that I saved his life, and as hehas a regard for his head, he feels some gratitude towardsme for having kept it on his shoulders." Ali approached hismaster, took his hand, and kissed it.

　　"Would it be impertinent, Signor Sinbad," said Franz, "toask you the particulars of this kindness?"

　　"Oh, they are simple enough," replied the host. "It seemsthe fellow had been caught wandering nearer to the harem ofthe Bey of Tunis than etiquette permits to one of his color,and he was condemned by the bey to have his tongue cut out,and his hand and head cut off; the tongue the first day, thehand the second, and the head the third. I always had adesire to have a mute in my service, so learning the day histongue was cut out, I went to the bey, and proposed to givehim for Ali a splendid double-barreled gun which I knew hewas very desirous of having. He hesitated a moment, he wasso very desirous to complete the poor devil's punishment.But when I added to the gun an English cutlass with which Ihad shivered his highness's yataghan to pieces, the beyyielded, and agreed to forgive the hand and head, but oncondition that the poor fellow never again set foot inTunis. This was a useless clause in the bargain, forwhenever the coward sees the first glimpse of the shores ofAfrica, he runs down below, and can only be induced toappear again when we are out of sight of that quarter of theglobe."

　　Franz remained a moment silent and pensive, hardly knowingwhat to think of the half-kindness, half-cruelty, with whichhis host related the brief narrative. "And like thecelebrated sailor whose name you have assumed," he said, byway of changing the conversation, "you pass your life intravelling?"

　　"Yes. I made a vow at a time when I little thought I shouldever be able to accomplish it," said the unknown with asingular smile; "and I made some others also which I hope Imay fulfil in due season." Although Sinbad pronounced thesewords with much calmness, his eyes gave forth gleams ofextraordinary ferocity.

　　"You have suffered a great deal, sir?" said Franzinquiringly.

　　Sinbad started and looked fixedly at him, as he replied,"What makes you suppose so?"

　　"Everything," answered Franz, -- "your voice, your look,your pallid complexion, and even the life you lead."

　　"I? -- I live the happiest life possible, the real life of apasha. I am king of all creation. I am pleased with oneplace, and stay there; I get tired of it, and leave it; I amfree as a bird and have wings like one; my attendants obeymy slightest wish. Sometimes I amuse myself by deliveringsome bandit or criminal from the bonds of the law. Then Ihave my mode of dispensing justice, silent and sure, withoutrespite or appeal, which condemns or pardons, and which noone sees. Ah, if you had tasted my life, you would notdesire any other, and would never return to the world unlessyou had some great project to accomplish there."

　　"Revenge, for instance!" observed Franz.

　　The unknown fixed on the young man one of those looks whichpenetrate into the depth of the heart and thoughts. "And whyrevenge?" he asked.

　　"Because," replied Franz, "you seem to me like a man who,persecuted by society, has a fearful account to settle withit."

　　"Ah," responded Sinbad, laughing with his singular laughwhich displayed his white and sharp teeth. "You have notguessed rightly. Such as you see me I am, a sort ofphilosopher, and one day perhaps I shall go to Paris torival Monsieur Appert, and the little man in the bluecloak."

　　"And will that be the first time you ever took thatjourney?"

　　"Yes; it will. I must seem to you by no means curious, but Iassure you that it is not my fault I have delayed it so long-- it will happen one day or the other."

　　"And do you propose to make this journey very shortly?"

　　"I do not know; it depends on circumstances which depend oncertain arrangements."

　　"I should like to be there at the time you come, and I willendeavor to repay you, as far as lies in my power, for yourliberal hospitality displayed to me at Monte Cristo."

　　"I should avail myself of your offer with pleasure," repliedthe host, "but, unfortunately, if I go there, it will be, inall probability, incognito."

　　The supper appeared to have been supplied solely for Franz,for the unknown scarcely touched one or two dishes of thesplendid banquet to which his guest did ample justice. ThenAli brought on the dessert, or rather took the baskets fromthe hands of the statues and placed them on the table.Between the two baskets he placed a small silver cup with asilver cover. The care with which Ali placed this cup on thetable roused Franz's curiosity. He raised the cover and sawa kind of greenish paste, something like preserved angelica,but which was perfectly unknown to him. He replaced the lid,as ignorant of what the cup contained as he was before hehad looked at it, and then casting his eyes towards his hosthe saw him smile at his disappointment. "You cannot guess,"said he, "what there is in that small vase, can you?"

　　"No, I really cannot."

　　"Well, then, that green preserve is nothing less than theambrosia which Hebe served at the table of Jupiter."

　　"But," replied Franz, "this ambrosia, no doubt, in passingthrough mortal hands has lost its heavenly appellation andassumed a human name; in vulgar phrase, what may you termthis composition, for which, to tell the truth, I do notfeel any particular desire?"

　　"Ah, thus it is that our material origin is revealed," criedSinbad; "we frequently pass so near to happiness withoutseeing, without regarding it, or if we do see and regard it,yet without recognizing it. Are you a man for thesubstantials, and is gold your god? taste this, and themines of Peru, Guzerat, and Golconda are opened to you. Areyou a man of imagination -- a poet? taste this, and theboundaries of possibility disappear; the fields of infinitespace open to you, you advance free in heart, free in mind,into the boundless realms of unfettered revery. Are youambitious, and do you seek after the greatnesses of theearth? taste this, and in an hour you will be a king, not aking of a petty kingdom hidden in some corner of Europe likeFrance, Spain, or England, but king of the world, king ofthe universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feetof Satan, you will be king and master of all the kingdoms ofthe earth. Is it not tempting what I offer you, and is itnot an easy thing, since it is only to do thus? look!" Atthese words he uncovered the small cup which contained thesubstance so lauded, took a teaspoonful of the magicsweetmeat, raised it to his lips, and swallowed it slowlywith his eyes half shut and his head bent backwards. Franzdid not disturb him whilst he absorbed his favoritesweetmeat, but when he had finished, he inquired, -- "What,then, is this precious stuff?"

　　"Did you ever hear," he replied, "of the Old Man of theMountain, who attempted to assassinate Philip Augustus?"

　　"Of course I have."

　　"Well, you know he reigned over a rich valley which wasoverhung by the mountain whence he derived his picturesquename. In this valley were magnificent gardens planted byHassen-ben-Sabah, and in these gardens isolated pavilions.Into these pavilions he admitted the elect, and there, saysMarco Polo, gave them to eat a certain herb, whichtransported them to Paradise, in the midst of ever-bloomingshrubs, ever-ripe fruit, and ever-lovely virgins. What thesehappy persons took for reality was but a dream; but it was adream so soft, so voluptuous, so enthralling, that they soldthemselves body and soul to him who gave it to them, andobedient to his orders as to those of a deity, struck downthe designated victim, died in torture without a murmur,believing that the death they underwent was but a quicktransition to that life of delights of which the holy herb,now before you had given them a slight foretaste."

　　"Then," cried Franz, "it is hashish! I know that -- by nameat least."

　　"That is it precisely, Signor Aladdin; it is hashish -- thepurest and most unadulterated hashish of Alexandria, -- thehashish of Abou-Gor, the celebrated maker, the only man, theman to whom there should be built a palace, inscribed withthese words, `A grateful world to the dealer in happiness.'"

　　"Do you know," said Franz, "I have a very great inclinationto judge for myself of the truth or exaggeration of youreulogies."

　　"Judge for yourself, Signor Aladdin -- judge, but do notconfine yourself to one trial. Like everything else, we musthabituate the senses to a fresh impression, gentle orviolent, sad or joyous. There is a struggle in natureagainst this divine substance, -- in nature which is notmade for joy and clings to pain. Nature subdued must yieldin the combat, the dream must succeed to reality, and thenthe dream reigns supreme, then the dream becomes life, andlife becomes the dream. But what changes occur! It is onlyby comparing the pains of actual being with the joys of theassumed existence, that you would desire to live no longer,but to dream thus forever. When you return to this mundanesphere from your visionary world, you would seem to leave aNeapolitan spring for a Lapland winter -- to quit paradisefor earth -- heaven for hell! Taste the hashish, guest ofmine -- taste the hashish."

　　Franz's only reply was to take a teaspoonful of themarvellous preparation, about as much in quantity as hishost had eaten, and lift it to his mouth. "Diable!" he said,after having swallowed the divine preserve. "I do not knowif the result will be as agreeable as you describe, but thething does not appear to me as palatable as you say."

　　"Because your palate his not yet been attuned to thesublimity of the substances it flavors. Tell me, the firsttime you tasted oysters, tea, porter, truffles, and sundryother dainties which you now adore, did you like them? Couldyou comprehend how the Romans stuffed their pheasants withassafoetida, and the Chinese eat swallows' nests? Eh? no!Well, it is the same with hashish; only eat for a week, andnothing in the world will seem to you to equal the delicacyof its flavor, which now appears to you flat anddistasteful. Let us now go into the adjoining chamber, whichis your apartment, and Ali will bring us coffee and pipes."They both arose, and while he who called himself Sinbad --and whom we have occasionally named so, that we might, likehis guest, have some title by which to distinguish him --gave some orders to the servant, Franz entered still anotherapartment. It was simply yet richly furnished. It was round,and a large divan completely encircled it. Divan, walls,ceiling, floor, were all covered with magnificent skins assoft and downy as the richest carpets; there wereheavy-maned lion-skins from Atlas, striped tiger-skins fromBengal; panther-skins from the Cape, spotted beautifully,like those that appeared to Dante; bear-skins from Siberia,fox-skins from Norway, and so on; and all these skins werestrewn in profusion one on the other, so that it seemed likewalking over the most mossy turf, or reclining on the mostluxurious bed. Both laid themselves down on the divan;chibouques with jasmine tubes and amber mouthpieces werewithin reach, and all prepared so that there was no need tosmoke the same pipe twice. Each of them took one, which Alilighted and then retired to prepare the coffee. There was amoment's silence, during which Sinbad gave himself up tothoughts that seemed to occupy him incessantly, even in themidst of his conversation; and Franz abandoned himself tothat mute revery, into which we always sink when smokingexcellent tobacco, which seems to remove with its fume allthe troubles of the mind, and to give the smoker in exchangeall the visions of the soul. Ali brought in the coffee. "Howdo you take it?" inquired the unknown; "in the French orTurkish style, strong or weak, sugar or none, cool orboiling? As you please; it is ready in all ways."

　　"I will take it in the Turkish style," replied Franz.

　　"And you are right," said his host; "it shows you have atendency for an Oriental life. Ah, those Orientals; they arethe only men who know how to live. As for me," he added,with one of those singular smiles which did not escape theyoung man, "when I have completed my affairs in Paris, Ishall go and die in the East; and should you wish to see meagain, you must seek me at Cairo, Bagdad, or Ispahan."

　　"Ma foi," said Franz, "it would be the easiest thing in theworld; for I feel eagle's wings springing out at myshoulders, and with those wings I could make a tour of theworld in four and twenty hours."

　　"Ah, yes, the hashish is beginning its work. Well, unfurlyour wings, and fly into superhuman regions; fear nothing,there is a watch over you; and if your wings, like those ofIcarus, melt before the sun, we are here to ease your fall."He then said something in Arabic to Ali, who made a sign ofobedience and withdrew, but not to any distance. As to Franza strange transformation had taken place in him. All thebodily fatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mindwhich the events of the evening had brought on, disappearedas they do at the first approach of sleep, when we are stillsufficiently conscious to be aware of the coming of slumber.His body seemed to acquire an airy lightness, his perceptionbrightened in a remarkable manner, his senses seemed toredouble their power, the horizon continued to expand; butit was not the gloomy horizon of vague alarms, and which hehad seen before he slept, but a blue, transparent, unboundedhorizon, with all the blue of the ocean, all the spangles ofthe sun, all the perfumes of the summer breeze; then, in themidst of the songs of his sailors, -- songs so clear andsonorous, that they would have made a divine harmony hadtheir notes been taken down, -- he saw the Island of MonteCristo, no longer as a threatening rock in the midst of thewaves, but as an oasis in the desert; then, as his boat drewnearer, the songs became louder, for an enchanting andmysterious harmony rose to heaven, as if some Loreley haddecreed to attract a soul thither, or Amphion, theenchanter, intended there to build a city.

　　At length the boat touched the shore, but without effort,without shock, as lips touch lips; and he entered the grottoamidst continued strains of most delicious melody. Hedescended, or rather seemed to descend, several steps,inhaling the fresh and balmy air, like that which may besupposed to reign around the grotto of Circe, formed fromsuch perfumes as set the mind a dreaming, and such fires asburn the very senses; and he saw again all he had seenbefore his sleep, from Sinbad, his singular host, to Ali,the mute attendant; then all seemed to fade away and becomeconfused before his eyes, like the last shadows of the magiclantern before it is extinguished, and he was again in thechamber of statues, lighted only by one of those pale andantique lamps which watch in the dead of the night over thesleep of pleasure. They were the same statues, rich in form,in attraction. and poesy, with eyes of fascination, smilesof love, and bright and flowing hair. They were Phryne,Cleopatra, Messalina, those three celebrated courtesans.Then among them glided like a pure ray, like a Christianangel in the midst of Olympus, one of those chaste figures,those calm shadows, those soft visions, which seemed to veilits virgin brow before these marble wantons. Then the threestatues advanced towards him with looks of love, andapproached the couch on which he was reposing, their feethidden in their long white tunics, their throats bare, hairflowing like waves, and assuming attitudes which the godscould not resist, but which saints withstood, and looksinflexible and ardent like those with which the serpentcharms the bird; and then he gave way before looks that heldhim in a torturing grasp and delighted his senses as with avoluptuous kiss. It seemed to Franz that he closed his eyes,and in a last look about him saw the vision of modestycompletely veiled; and then followed a dream of passion likethat promised by the Prophet to the elect. Lips of stoneturned to flame, breasts of ice became like heated lava, sothat to Franz, yielding for the first time to the sway ofthe drug, love was a sorrow and voluptuousness a torture, asburning mouths were pressed to his thirsty lips, and he washeld in cool serpent-like embraces. The more he stroveagainst this unhallowed passion the more his senses yieldedto its thrall, and at length, weary of a struggle that taxedhis very soul, he gave way and sank back breathless andexhausted beneath the kisses of these marble goddesses, andthe enchantment of his marvellous dream.

　　Chapter 32The Waking.

　　When Franz returned to himself, he seemed still to be in adream. He thought himself in a sepulchre, into which a rayof sunlight in pity scarcely penetrated. He stretched forthhis hand, and touched stone; he rose to his seat, and foundhimself lying on his bournous in a bed of dry heather, verysoft and odoriferous. The vision had fled; and as if thestatues had been but shadows from the tomb, they hadvanished at his waking. He advanced several paces towardsthe point whence the light came, and to all the excitementof his dream succeeded the calmness of reality. He foundthat he was in a grotto, went towards the opening, andthrough a kind of fanlight saw a blue sea and an azure sky.The air and water were shining in the beams of the morningsun; on the shore the sailors were sitting, chatting andlaughing; and at ten yards from them the boat was at anchor,undulating gracefully on the water. There for some time heenjoyed the fresh breeze which played on his brow, andlistened to the dash of the waves on the beach, that leftagainst the rocks a lace of foam as white as silver. He wasfor some time without reflection or thought for the divinecharm which is in the things of nature, specially after afantastic dream; then gradually this view of the outerworld, so calm, so pure, so grand, reminded him of theillusiveness of his vision, and once more awakened memory.He recalled his arrival on the island, his presentation to asmuggler chief, a subterranean palace full of splendor, anexcellent supper, and a spoonful of hashish. It seemed,however, even in the very face of open day, that at least ayear had elapsed since all these things had passed, so deepwas the impression made in his mind by the dream, and sostrong a hold had it taken of his imagination. Thus everynow and then he saw in fancy amid the sailors, seated on arock, or undulating in the vessel, one of the shadows whichhad shared his dream with looks and kisses. Otherwise, hishead was perfectly clear, and his body refreshed; he wasfree from the slightest headache; on the contrary, he felt acertain degree of lightness, a faculty for absorbing thepure air, and enjoying the bright sunshine more vividly thanever.

　　He went gayly up to the sailors, who rose as soon as theyperceived him; and the patron, accosting him, said, "TheSignor Sinbad has left his compliments for your excellency,and desires us to express the regret he feels at not beingable to take his leave in person; but he trusts you willexcuse him, as very important business calls him to Malaga."

　　"So, then, Gaetano," said Franz, "this is, then, allreality; there exists a man who has received me in thisisland, entertained me right royally, and his departed whileI was asleep?"

　　"He exists as certainly as that you may see his small yachtwith all her sails spread; and if you will use your glass,you will, in all probability, recognize your host in themidst of his crew." So saying, Gaetano pointed in adirection in which a small vessel was making sail towardsthe southern point of Corsica. Franz adjusted his telescope,and directed it towards the yacht. Gaetano was not mistaken.At the stern the mysterious stranger was standing up lookingtowards the shore, and holding a spy-glass in his hand. Hewas attired as he had been on the previous evening, andwaved his pocket-handkerchief to his guest in token ofadieu. Franz returned the salute by shaking his handkerchiefas an exchange of signals. After a second, a slight cloud ofsmoke was seen at the stern of the vessel, which rosegracefully as it expanded in the air, and then Franz heard aslight report. "There, do you hear?" observed Gaetano; "heis bidding you adieu." The young man took his carbine andfired it in the air, but without any idea that the noisecould be heard at the distance which separated the yachtfrom the shore.

　　"What are your excellency's orders?" inquired Gaetano.

　　"In the first place, light me a torch."

　　"Ah, yes, I understand," replied the patron, "to find theentrance to the enchanted apartment. With much pleasure,your excellency, if it would amuse you; and I will get youthe torch you ask for. But I too have had the idea you have,and two or three times the same fancy has come over me; butI have always given it up. Giovanni, light a torch," headded, "and give it to his excellency."

　　Giovanni obeyed. Franz took the lamp, and entered thesubterranean grotto, followed by Gaetano. He recognized theplace where he had awaked by the bed of heather that wasthere; but it was in vain that he carried his torch allround the exterior surface of the grotto. He saw nothing,unless that, by traces of smoke, others had before himattempted the same thing, and, like him, in vain. Yet he didnot leave a foot of this granite wall, as impenetrable asfuturity, without strict scrutiny; he did not see a fissurewithout introducing the blade of his hunting sword into it,or a projecting point on which he did not lean and press inthe hopes it would give way. All was vain; and he lost twohours in his attempts, which were at last utterly useless.At the end of this time he gave up his search, and Gaetanosmiled.

　　When Franz appeared again on the shore, the yacht onlyseemed like a small white speck on the horizon. He lookedagain through his glass, but even then he could notdistinguish anything. Gaetano reminded him that he had comefor the purpose of shooting goats, which he had utterlyforgotten. He took his fowling-piece, and began to hunt overthe island with the air of a man who is fulfilling a duty,rather than enjoying a pleasure; and at the end of a quarterof an hour he had killed a goat and two kids. These animals,though wild and agile as chamois, were too much likedomestic goats, and Franz could not consider them as game.Moreover, other ideas, much more enthralling, occupied hismind. Since, the evening before, he had really been the heroof one of the tales of the "Thousand and One Nights," and hewas irresistibly attracted towards the grotto. Then, inspite of the failure of his first search, he began a second,after having told Gaetano to roast one of the two kids. Thesecond visit was a long one, and when he returned the kidwas roasted and the repast ready. Franz was sitting on thespot where he was on the previous evening when hismysterious host had invited him to supper; and he saw thelittle yacht, now like a sea-gull on the wave, continuingher flight towards Corsica. "Why," he remarked to Gaetano,"you told me that Signor Sinbad was going to Malaga, whileit seems he is in the direction of Porto-Vecchio."

　　"Don't you remember," said the patron, "I told you thatamong the crew there were two Corsican brigands?"

　　"True; and he is going to land them," added Franz.

　　"Precisely so," replied Gaetano. "Ah, he is one who fearsneither God nor Satan, they say, and would at any time runfifty leagues out of his course to do a poor devil aservice."

　　"But such services as these might involve him with theauthorities of the country in which he practices this kindof philanthropy," said Franz.

　　"And what cares he for that," replied Gaetano with a laugh,"or any authorities? He smiles at them. Let them try topursue him! Why, in the first place, his yacht is not aship, but a bird, and he would beat any frigate three knotsin every nine; and if he were to throw himself on the coast,why, is he not certain of finding friends everywhere?"

　　It was perfectly clear that the Signor Sinbad, Franz's host,had the honor of being on excellent terms with the smugglersand bandits along the whole coast of the Mediterranean, andso enjoyed exceptional privileges. As to Franz, he had nolonger any inducement to remain at Monte Cristo. He had lostall hope of detecting the secret of the grotto; heconsequently despatched his breakfast, and, his boat beingready, he hastened on board, and they were soon under way.At the moment the boat began her course they lost sight ofthe yacht, as it disappeared in the gulf of Porto-Vecchio.With it was effaced the last trace of the preceding night;and then supper, Sinbad, hashish, statues, -- all became adream for Franz. The boat sailed on all day and all night,and next morning, when the sun rose, they had lost sight ofMonte Cristo. When Franz had once again set foot on shore,he forgot, for the moment at least, the events which hadjust passed, while he finished his affairs of pleasure atFlorence, and then thought of nothing but how he shouldrejoin his companion, who was awaiting him at Rome.

　　He set out, and on the Saturday evening reached the EternalCity by the mail-coach. An apartment, as we have said, hadbeen retained beforehand, and thus he had but to go toSignor Pastrini's hotel. But this was not so easy a matter,for the streets were thronged with people, and Rome wasalready a prey to that low and feverish murmur whichprecedes all great events; and at Rome there are four greatevents in every year, -- the Carnival, Holy Week, CorpusChristi, and the Feast of St. Peter. All the rest of theyear the city is in that state of dull apathy, between lifeand death, which renders it similar to a kind of stationbetween this world and the next -- a sublime spot, aresting-place full of poetry and character, and at whichFranz had already halted five or six times, and at each timefound it more marvellous and striking. At last he made hisway through the mob, which was continually increasing andgetting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel. Onhis first inquiry he was told, with the impertinencepeculiar to hired hackney-coachmen and inn-keepers withtheir houses full, that there was no room for him at theHotel de Londres. Then he sent his card to Signor Pastrini,and asked for Albert de Morcerf. This plan succeeded; andSignor Pastrini himself ran to him, excusing himself forhaving made his excellency wait, scolding the waiters,taking the candlestick from the porter, who was ready topounce on the traveller and was about to lead him to Albert,when Morcerf himself appeared.

　　The apartment consisted of two small rooms and a parlor. Thetwo rooms looked onto the street -- a fact which SignorPastrini commented upon as an inappreciable advantage. Therest of the floor was hired by a very rich gentleman who wassupposed to be a Sicilian or Maltese; but the host wasunable to decide to which of the two nations the travellerbelonged. "Very good, signor Pastrini," said Franz; "but wemust have some supper instantly, and a carriage for tomorrowand the following days."

　　"As to supper," replied the landlord, "you shall be servedimmediately; but as for the carriage" --

　　"What as to the carriage?" exclaimed Albert. "Come, come,Signor Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage."

　　"Sir," replied the host, "we will do all in our power toprocure you one -- this is all I can say."

　　"And when shall we know?" inquired Franz.

　　"To-morrow morning," answered the inn-keeper.

　　"Oh, the deuce! then we shall pay the more, that's all, Isee plainly enough. At Drake's or Aaron's one paystwenty-five lire for common days, and thirty or thirty-fivelire a day more for Sundays and feast days; add five lire aday more for extras, that will make forty, and there's anend of it."

　　"I am afraid if we offer them double that we shall notprocure a carriage."

　　"Then they must put horses to mine. It is a little worse forthe journey, but that's no matter."

　　"There are no horses." Albert looked at Franz like a man whohears a reply he does not understand.

　　"Do you understand that, my dear Franz -- no horses?" hesaid, "but can't we have post-horses?"

　　"They have been all hired this fortnight, and there are noneleft but those absolutely requisite for posting."

　　"What are we to say to this?" asked Franz.

　　"I say, that when a thing completely surpasses mycomprehension, I am accustomed not to dwell on that thing,but to pass to another. Is supper ready, Signor Pastrini?"

　　"Yes, your excellency."

　　"Well, then, let us sup."

　　"But the carriage and horses?" said Franz.

　　"Be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it isonly a question of how much shall be charged for them."Morcerf then, with that delighted philosophy which believesthat nothing is impossible to a full purse or well-linedpocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept soundly, and dreamedhe was racing all over Rome at Carnival time in a coach withsix horses.

　　Chapter 33Roman Bandits.

　　The next morning Franz woke first, and instantly rang thebell. The sound had not yet died away when Signor Pastrinihimself entered.

　　"Well, excellency," said the landlord triumphantly, andwithout waiting for Franz to question him, "I fearedyesterday, when I would not promise you anything, that youwere too late -- there is not a single carriage to be had --that is, for the last three days of the carnival."

　　"Yes," returned Franz, "for the very three days it is mostneeded."

　　"What is the matter?" said Albert, entering; "no carriage tobe had?"

　　"Just so," returned Franz, "you have guessed it."

　　"Well, your Eternal City is a nice sort of place."

　　"That is to say, excellency," replied Pastrini, who wasdesirous of keeping up the dignity of the capital of theChristian world in the eyes of his guest, "that there are nocarriages to be had from Sunday to Tuesday evening, but fromnow till Sunday you can have fifty if you please."

　　"Ah, that is something," said Albert; "to-day is Thursday,and who knows what may arrive between this and Sunday?"

　　"Ten or twelve thousand travellers will arrive," repliedFranz, "which will make it still more difficult."

　　"My friend," said Morcerf, "let us enjoy the present withoutgloomy forebodings for the future."

　　"At least we can have a window?"

　　"Where?"

　　"In the Corso."

　　"Ah, a window!" exclaimed Signor Pastrini, -- "utterlyimpossible; there was only one left on the fifth floor ofthe Doria Palace, and that has been let to a Russian princefor twenty sequins a day."

　　The two young men looked at each other with an air ofstupefaction.

　　"Well," said Franz to Albert, "do you know what is the bestthing we can do? It is to pass the Carnival at Venice; therewe are sure of obtaining gondolas if we cannot havecarriages."

　　"Ah, the devil, no," cried Albert; "I came to Rome to seethe Carnival, and I will, though I see it on stilts."

　　"Bravo! an excellent idea. We will disguise ourselves asmonster pulchinellos or shepherds of the Landes, and weshall have complete success."

　　"Do your excellencies still wish for a carriage from now toSunday morning?"

　　"Parbleu!" said Albert, "do you think we are going to runabout on foot in the streets of Rome, like lawyer's clerks?"

　　"I hasten to comply with your excellencies' wishes; only, Itell you beforehand, the carriage will cost you six piastresa day."

　　"And, as I am not a millionaire, like the gentleman in thenext apartments," said Franz, "I warn you, that as I havebeen four times before at Rome, I know the prices of all thecarriages; we will give you twelve piastres for to-day,tomorrow, and the day after, and then you will make a goodprofit."

　　"But, excellency" -- said Pastrini, still striving to gainhis point.

　　"Now go," returned Franz, "or I shall go myself and bargainwith your affettatore, who is mine also; he is an old friendof mine, who has plundered me pretty well already, and, inthe hope of making more out of me, he will take a less pricethan the one I offer you; you will lose the preference, andthat will be your fault."

　　"Do not give yourselves the trouble, excellency," returnedSignor Pastrini, with the smile peculiar to the Italianspeculator when he confesses defeat; "I will do all I can,and I hope you will be satisfied."

　　"And now we understand each other."

　　"When do you wish the carriage to be here?"

　　"In an hour."

　　"In an hour it will be at the door."

　　An hour after the vehicle was at the door; it was a hackconveyance which was elevated to the rank of a privatecarriage in honor of the occasion, but, in spite of itshumble exterior, the young men would have thought themselveshappy to have secured it for the last three days of theCarnival. "Excellency," cried the cicerone, seeing Franzapproach the window, "shall I bring the carriage nearer tothe palace?"

　　Accustomed as Franz was to the Italian phraseology, hisfirst impulse was to look round him, but these words wereaddressed to him. Franz was the "excellency," the vehiclewas the "carriage," and the Hotel de Londres was the"palace." The genius for laudation characteristic of therace was in that phrase.

　　Franz and Albert descended, the carriage approached thepalace; their excellencies stretched their legs along theseats; the cicerone sprang into the seat behind. "Where doyour excellencics wish to go?" asked he.

　　"To Saint Peter's first, and then to the Colosseum,"returned Albert. But Albert did not know that it takes a dayto see Saint Peter's, and a month to study it. The day waspassed at Saint Peter's alone. Suddenly the daylight beganto fade away; Franz took out his watch -- it was half-pastfour. They returned to the hotel; at the door Franz orderedthe coachman to be ready at eight. He wished to show Albertthe Colosseum by moonlight, as he had shown him SaintPeter's by daylight. When we show a friend a city one hasalready visited, we feel the same pride as when we point outa woman whose lover we have been. He was to leave the cityby the Porta del Popolo, skirt the outer wall, and re-enterby the Porta San Giovanni; thus they would behold theColosseum without finding their impressions dulled by firstlooking on the Capitol, the Forum, the Arch of SeptimusSeverus, the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, and the ViaSacra. They sat down to dinner. Signor Pastrini had promisedthem a banquet; he gave them a tolerable repast. At the endof the dinner he entered in person. Franz thought that hecame to hear his dinner praised, and began accordingly, butat the first words he was interrupted. "Excellency," saidPastrini, "I am delighted to have your approbation, but itwas not for that I came."

　　"Did you come to tell us you have procured a carriage?"asked Albert, lighting his cigar.

　　"No; and your excellencies will do well not to think of thatany longer; at Rome things can or cannot be done; when youare told anything cannot he done, there is an end of it."

　　"It is much more convenient at Paris, -- when anythingcannot be done, you pay double, and it is done directly."

　　"That is what all the French say," returned Signor Pastrini,somewhat piqued; "for that reason, I do not understand whythey travel."

　　"But," said Albert, emitting a volume of smoke and balancinghis chair on its hind legs, "only madmen, or blockheads likeus, ever do travel. Men in their senses do not quit theirhotel in the Rue du Helder, their walk on the Boulevard deGand, and the Cafe de Paris." It is of course understoodthat Albert resided in the aforesaid street, appeared everyday on the fashionable walk, and dined frequently at theonly restaurant where you can really dine, that is, if youare on good terms with its frequenters. Signor Pastriniremained silent a short time; it was evident that he wasmusing over this answer, which did not seem very clear."But," said Franz, in his turn interrupting his host'smeditations, "you had some motive for coming here, may I begto know what it was?"

　　"Ah, yes; you have ordered your carriage at eight o'clockprecisely?"

　　"I have."

　　"You intend visiting Il Colosseo."

　　"You mean the Colosseum?"

　　"It is the same thing. You have told your coachman to leavethe city by the Porta del Popolo, to drive round the walls,and re-enter by the Porta San Giovanni?"

　　"These are my words exactly."

　　"Well, this route is impossible."

　　"Impossible!"

　　"Very dangerous, to say the least."

　　"Dangerous! -- and why?"

　　"On account of the famous Luigi Vampa."

　　"Pray, who may this famous Luigi Vampa be?" inquired Albert;"he may be very famous at Rome, but I can assure you he isquite unknown at Paris."

　　"What! do you not know him?"

　　"I have not that honor."

　　"You have never heard his name?"

　　"Never."

　　"Well, then, he is a bandit, compared to whom the Decesarisand the Gasparones were mere children."

　　"Now then, Albert," cried Franz, "here is a bandit for youat last."

　　"I forewarn you, Signor Pastrini, that I shall not believeone word of what you are going to tell us; having told youthis, begin."

　　"Once upon a time" --

　　"Well, go on." Signor Pastrini turned toward Franz, whoseemed to him the more reasonable of the two; we must do himjustice, -- he had had a great many Frenchmen in his house,but had never been able to comprehend them. "Excellency,"said he gravely, addressing Franz, "if you look upon me as aliar, it is useless for me to say anything; it was for yourinterest I" --

　　"Albert does not say you are a liar, Signor Pastrini," saidFranz, "but that he will not believe what you are going totell us, -- but I will believe all you say; so proceed."

　　"But if your excellency doubt my veracity" --

　　"Signor Pastrini," returned Franz, "you are more susceptiblethan Cassandra, who was a prophetess, and yet no onebelieved her; while you, at least, are sure of the credenceof half your audience. Come, sit down, and tell us all aboutthis Signor Vampa."

　　"I had told your excellency he is the most famous bandit wehave had since the days of Mastrilla."

　　"Well, what has this bandit to do with the order I havegiven the coachman to leave the city by the Porta delPopolo, and to re-enter by the Porta San Giovanni?"

　　"This," replied Signor Pastrini, "that you will go out byone, but I very much doubt your returning by the other."

　　"Why?" asked Franz.

　　"Because, after nightfall, you are not safe fifty yards fromthe gates."

　　"On your honor is that true?" cried Albert.

　　"Count," returned Signor Pastrini, hurt at Albert's repeateddoubts of the truth of his assertions, "I do not say this toyou, but to your companion, who knows Rome, and knows, too,that these things are not to be laughed at."

　　"My dear fellow," said Albert, turning to Franz, "here is anadmirable adventure; we will fill our carriage with pistols,blunderbusses, and double-barrelled guns. Luigi Vampa comesto take us, and we take him -- we bring him back to Rome,and present him to his holiness the Pope, who asks how hecan repay so great a service; then we merely ask for acarriage and a pair of horses, and we see the Carnival inthe carriage, and doubtless the Roman people will crown usat the Capitol, and proclaim us, like Curtius and the veiledHoratius, the preservers of their country." Whilst Albertproposed this scheme, Signor Pastrini's face assumed anexpression impossible to describe.

　　"And pray," asked Franz, "where are these pistols,blunderbusses, and other deadly weapons with which youintend filling the carriage?"

　　"Not out of my armory, for at Terracina I was plundered evenof my hunting-knife."

　　"I shared the same fate at Aquapendente."

　　"Do you know, Signor Pastrini," said Albert, lighting asecond cigar at the first, "that this practice is veryconvenient for bandits, and that it seems to be due to anarrangement of their own." Doubtless Signor Pastrini foundthis pleasantry compromising, for he only answered half thequestion, and then he spoke to Franz, as the only one likelyto listen with attention. "Your excellency knows that it isnot customary to defend yourself when attacked by bandits."

　　"What!" cried Albert, whose courage revolted at the idea ofbeing plundered tamely, "not make any resistance!"

　　"No, for it would be useless. What could you do against adozen bandits who spring out of some pit, ruin, or aqueduct,and level their pieces at you?"

　　"Eh, parbleu! -- they should kill me."

　　The inn-keeper turned to Franz with an air that seemed tosay, "Your friend is decidedly mad."

　　"My dear Albert," returned Franz, "your answer is sublime,and worthy the `Let him die,' of Corneille, only, whenHorace made that answer, the safety of Rome was concerned;but, as for us, it is only to gratify a whim, and it wouldbe ridiculous to risk our lives for so foolish a motive."Albert poured himself out a glass of lacryma Christi, whichhe sipped at intervals, muttering some unintelligible words.

　　"Well, Signor Pastrini," said Franz, "now that my companionis quieted, and you have seen how peaceful my intentionsare, tell me who is this Luigi Vampa. Is he a shepherd or anobleman? -- young or old? -- tall or short? Describe him,in order that, if we meet him by chance, like Bugaboo Johnor Lara, we may recognize him."

　　"You could not apply to any one better able to inform you onall these points, for I knew him when he was a child, andone day that I fell into his hands, going from Ferentino toAlatri, he, fortunately for me, recollected me, and set mefree, not only without ransom, but made me a present of avery splendid watch, and related his history to me."

　　"Let us see the watch," said Albert.

　　Signor Pastrini drew from his fob a magnificent Breguet,bearing the name of its maker, of Parisian manufacture, anda count's coronet.

　　"Here it is," said he.

　　"Peste," returned Albert, "I compliment you on it; I haveits fellow" -- he took his watch from his waistcoat pocket-- "and it cost me 3,000 francs."

　　"Let us hear the history," said Franz, motioning SignorPastrini to seat himself.

　　"Your excellencies permit it?" asked the host.

　　"Pardieu!" cried Albert, "you are not a preacher, to remainstanding!"

　　The host sat down, after having made each of them arespectful bow, which meant that he was ready to tell themall they wished to know concerning Luigi Vampa. "You tellme," said Franz, at the moment Signor Pastrini was about toopen his mouth, "that you knew Luigi Vampa when he was achild -- he is still a young man, then?"

　　"A young man? he is only two and twenty; -- he will gainhimself a reputation."

　　"What do you think of that, Albert? -- at two and twenty tobe thus famous?"

　　"Yes, and at his age, Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon, whohave all made some noise in the world, were quite behindhim."

　　"So," continued Franz, "the hero of this history is only twoand twenty?"

　　"Scarcely so much."

　　"Is he tall or short?"

　　"Of the middle height -- about the same stature as hisexcellency," returned the host, pointing to Albert.

　　"Thanks for the comparison," said Albert, with a bow.

　　"Go on, Signor Pastrini," continued Franz, smiling at hisfriend's susceptibility. "To what class of society does hebelong?"

　　"He was a shepherd-boy attached to the farm of the Count ofSan-Felice, situated between Palestrina and the lake ofGabri; he was born at Pampinara, and entered the count'sservice when he was five years old; his father was also ashepherd, who owned a small flock, and lived by the wool andthe milk, which he sold at Rome. When quite a child, thelittle Vampa displayed a most extraordinary precocity. Oneday, when he was seven years old, he came to the curate ofPalestrina, and asked to be taught to read; it was somewhatdifficult, for he could not quit his flock; but the goodcurate went every day to say mass at a little hamlet toopoor to pay a priest and which, having no other name, wascalled Borgo; he told Luigi that he might meet him on hisreturn, and that then he would give him a lesson, warninghim that it would be short, and that he must profit as muchas possible by it. The child accepted joyfully. Every dayLuigi led his flock to graze on the road that leads fromPalestrina to Borgo; every day, at nine o'clock in themorning, the priest and the boy sat down on a bank by thewayside, and the little shepherd took his lesson out of thepriest's breviary. At the end of three months he had learnedto read. This was not enough -- he must now learn to write.The priest had a writing teacher at Rome make threealphabets -- one large, one middling, and one small; andpointed out to him that by the help of a sharp instrument hecould trace the letters on a slate, and thus learn to write.The same evening, when the flock was safe at the farm, thelittle Luigi hastened to the smith at Palestrina, took alarge nail, heated and sharpened it, and formed a sort ofstylus. The next morning he gathered an armful of pieces ofslate and began. At the end of three months he had learnedto write. The curate, astonished at his quickness andintelligence, made him a present of pens, paper, and apenknife. This demanded new effort, but nothing compared tothe first; at the end of a week he wrote as well with thispen as with the stylus. The curate related the incident tothe Count of San-Felice, who sent for the little shepherd,made him read and write before him, ordered his attendant tolet him eat with the domestics, and to give him two piastresa month. With this, Luigi purchased books and pencils. Heapplied his imitative powers to everything, and, likeGiotto, when young, he drew on his slate sheep, houses, andtrees. Then, with his knife, he began to carve all sorts ofobjects in wood; it was thus that Pinelli, the famoussculptor, had commenced.

　　"A girl of six or seven -- that is, a little younger thanVampa -- tended sheep on a farm near Palestrina; she was anorphan, born at Valmontone and was named Teresa. The twochildren met, sat down near each other, let their flocksmingle together, played, laughed, and conversed together; inthe evening they separated the Count of San-Felice's flockfrom those of Baron Cervetri, and the children returned totheir respective farms, promising to meet the next morning.The next day they kept their word, and thus they grew uptogether. Vampa was twelve, and Teresa eleven. And yet theirnatural disposition revealed itself. Beside his taste forthe fine arts, which Luigi had carried as far as he could inhis solitude, he was given to alternating fits of sadnessand enthusiasm, was often angry and capricious, and alwayssarcastic. None of the lads of Pampinara, Palestrina, orValmontone had been able to gain any influence over him oreven to become his companion. His disposition (alwaysinclined to exact concessions rather than to make them) kepthim aloof from all friendships. Teresa alone ruled by alook, a word, a gesture, this impetuous character, whichyielded beneath the hand of a woman, and which beneath thehand of a man might have broken, but could never have beenbended. Teresa was lively and gay, but coquettish to excess.The two piastres that Luigi received every month from theCount of San-Felice's steward, and the price of all thelittle carvings in wood he sold at Rome, were expended inear-rings, necklaces, and gold hairpins. So that, thanks toher friend's generosity, Teresa was the most beautiful andthe best-attired peasant near Rome. The two children grew uptogether, passing all their time with each other, and givingthemselves up to the wild ideas of their differentcharacters. Thus, in all their dreams, their wishes, andtheir conversations, Vampa saw himself the captain of avessel, general of an army, or governor of a province.Teresa saw herself rich, superbly attired, and attended by atrain of liveried domestics. Then, when they had thus passedthe day in building castles in the air, they separated theirflocks, and descended from the elevation of their dreams tothe reality of their humble position.

　　"One day the young shepherd told the count's steward that hehad seen a wolf come out of the Sabine mountains, and prowlaround his flock. The steward gave him a gun; this was whatVampa longed for. This gun had an excellent barrel, made atBreschia, and carrying a ball with the precision of anEnglish rifle; but one day the count broke the stock, andhad then cast the gun aside. This, however, was nothing to asculptor like Vampa; he examined the broken stock,calculated what change it would require to adapt the gun tohis shoulder, and made a fresh stock, so beautifully carvedthat it would have fetched fifteen or twenty piastres, hadhe chosen to sell it. But nothing could be farther from histhoughts. For a long time a gun had been the young man'sgreatest ambition. In every country where independence hastaken the place of liberty, the first desire of a manlyheart is to possess a weapon, which at once renders himcapable of defence or attack, and, by rendering its ownerterrible, often makes him feared. From this moment Vampadevoted all his leisure time to perfecting himself in theuse of his precious weapon; he purchased powder and ball,and everything served him for a mark -- the trunk of someold and moss-grown olive-tree, that grew on the Sabinemountains; the fox, as he quitted his earth on somemarauding excursion; the eagle that soared above theirheads: and thus he soon became so expert, that Teresaovercame the terror she at first felt at the report, andamused herself by watching him direct the ball wherever hepleased, with as much accuracy as if he placed it by hand.

　　"One evening a wolf emerged from a pine-wood hear which theywere usually stationed, but the wolf had scarcely advancedten yards ere he was dead. Proud of this exploit, Vampa tookthe dead animal on his shoulders, and carried him to thefarm. These exploits had gained Luigi considerablereputation. The man of superior abilities always findsadmirers, go where he will. He was spoken of as the mostadroit, the strongest, and the most courageous contadino forten leagues around; and although Teresa was universallyallowed to be the most beautiful girl of the Sabines, no onehad ever spoken to her of love, because it was known thatshe was beloved by Vampa. And yet the two young people hadnever declared their affection; they had grown together liketwo trees whose roots are mingled, whose branchesintertwined, and whose intermingled perfume rises to theheavens. Only their wish to see each other had become anecessity, and they would have preferred death to a day'sseparation. Teresa was sixteen, and Vampa seventeen. Aboutthis time, a band of brigands that had established itself inthe Lepini mountains began to be much spoken of. Thebrigands have never been really extirpated from theneighborhood of Rome. Sometimes a chief is wanted, but whena chief presents himself he rarely has to wait long for aband of followers.

　　"The celebrated Cucumetto, pursued in the Abruzzo, drivenout of the kingdom of Naples, where he had carried on aregular war, had crossed the Garigliano, like Manfred, andhad taken refuge on the banks of the Amasine between Sonninoand Juperno. He strove to collect a band of followers, andfollowed the footsteps of Decesaris and Gasperone, whom hehoped to surpass. Many young men of Palestrina, Frascati,and Pampinara had disappeared. Their disappearance at firstcaused much disquietude; but it was soon known that they hadjoined Cucumetto. After some time Cucumetto became theobject of universal attention; the most extraordinary traitsof ferocious daring and brutality were related of him. Oneday he carried off a young girl, the daughter of a surveyorof Frosinone. The bandit's laws are positive; a young girlbelongs first to him who carries her off, then the rest drawlots for her, and she is abandoned to their brutality untildeath relieves her sufferings. When their parents aresufficiently rich to pay a ransom, a messenger is sent tonegotiate; the prisoner is hostage for the security of themessenger; should the ransom be refused, the prisoner isirrevocably lost. The young girl's lover was in Cucumetto'stroop; his name was Carlini. When she recognized her lover,the poor girl extended her arms to him, and believed herselfsafe; but Carlini felt his heart sink, for he but too wellknew the fate that awaited her. However, as he was afavorite with Cucumetto, as he had for three yearsfaithfully served him, and as he had saved his life byshooting a dragoon who was about to cut him down, he hopedthe chief would have pity on him. He took Cucumetto oneside, while the young girl, seated at the foot of a hugepine that stood in the centre of the forest, made a veil ofher picturesque head-dress to hide her face from thelascivious gaze of the bandits. There he told the chief all-- his affection for the prisoner, their promises of mutualfidelity, and how every night, since he had been near, theyhad met in some neighboring ruins.

　　"It so happened that night that Cucumetto had sent Carlinito a village, so that he had been unable to go to the placeof meeting. Cucumetto had been there, however, by accident,as he said, and had carried the maiden off. Carlini besoughthis chief to make an exception in Rita's favor, as herfather was rich, and could pay a large ransom. Cucumettoseemed to yield to his friend's entreaties, and bade himfind a shepherd to send to Rita's father at Frosinone.Carlini flew joyfully to Rita, telling her she was saved,and bidding her write to her father, to inform him what hadoccurred, and that her ransom was fixed at three hundredpiastres. Twelve hours' delay was all that was granted --that is, until nine the next morning. The instant the letterwas written, Carlini seized it, and hastened to the plain tofind a messenger. He found a young shepherd watching hisflock. The natural messengers of the bandits are theshepherds who live between the city and the mountains,between civilized and savage life. The boy undertook thecommission, promising to be in Frosinone in less than anhour. Carlini returned, anxious to see his mistress, andannounce the joyful intelligence. He found the troop in theglade, supping off the provisions exacted as contributionsfrom the peasants; but his eye vainly sought Rita andCucumetto among them. He inquired where they were, and wasanswered by a burst of laughter. A cold perspiration burstfrom every pore, and his hair stood on end. He repeated hisquestion. One of the bandits rose, and offered him a glassfilled with Orvietto, saying, `To the health of the braveCucumetto and the fair Rita.' At this moment Carlini heard awoman's cry; he divined the truth, seized the glass, brokeit across the face of him who presented it, and rushedtowards the spot whence the cry came. After a hundred yardshe turned the corner of the thicket; he found Rita senselessin the arms of Cucumetto. At the sight of Carlini, Cucumettorose, a pistol in each hand. The two brigands looked at eachother for a moment -- the one with a smile of lasciviousnesson his lips, the other with the pallor of death on his brow.A terrible battle between the two men seemed imminent; butby degrees Carlini's features relaxed, his hand, which hadgrasped one of the pistols in his belt, fell to his side.Rita lay between them. The moon lighted the group.

　　"`Well,' said Cucumetto, `have you executed yourcommission?'

　　"`Yes, captain,' returned Carlini. `At nine o'clockto-morrow Rita's father will be here with the money.' -- `Itis well; in the meantime, we will have a merry night; thisyoung girl is charming, and does credit to your taste. Now,as I am not egotistical, we will return to our comrades anddraw lots for her.' -- `You have determined, then, toabandon her to the common law?" said Carlini.

　　"`Why should an exception be made in her favor?'

　　"`I thought that my entreaties' --

　　"`What right have you, any more than the rest, to ask for anexception?' -- `It is true.' -- `But never mind,' continuedCucumetto, laughing, `sooner or later your turn will come.'Carlini's teeth clinched convulsively.

　　"`Now, then,' said Cucumetto, advancing towards the otherbandits, `are you coming?' -- `I follow you.'

　　"Cucumetto departed, without losing sight of Carlini, for,doubtless, he feared lest he should strike him unawares; butnothing betrayed a hostile design on Carlini's part. He wasstanding, his arms folded, near Rita, who was stillinsensible. Cucumetto fancied for a moment the young man wasabout to take her in his arms and fly; but this matteredlittle to him now Rita had been his; and as for the money,three hundred piastres distributed among the band was sosmall a sum that he cared little about it. He continued tofollow the path to the glade; but, to his great surprise,Carlini arrived almost as soon as himself. `Let us drawlots! let us draw lots!' cried all the brigands, when theysaw the chief.

　　"Their demand was fair, and the chief inclined his head insign of acquiescence. The eyes of all shone fiercely as theymade their demand, and the red light of the fire made themlook like demons. The names of all, including Carlini, wereplaced in a hat, and the youngest of the band drew forth aticket; the ticket bore the name of Diovolaccio. He was theman who had proposed to Carlini the health of their chief,and to whom Carlini replied by breaking the glass across hisface. A large wound, extending from the temple to the mouth,was bleeding profusely. Diovalaccio, seeing himself thusfavored by fortune, burst into a loud laugh. `Captain,' saidhe, `just now Carlini would not drink your health when Iproposed it to him; propose mine to him, and let us see ifhe will be more condescending to you than to me.' Every oneexpected an explosion on Carlini's part; but to their greatsurprise, he took a glass in one hand and a flask in theother, and filling it, -- `Your health, Diavolaccio,' saidhe calmly, and he drank it off, without his hand tremblingin the least. Then sitting down by the fire, `My supper,'said he; `my expedition has given me an appetite.' -- `Welldone, Carlini!' cried the brigands; `that is acting like agood fellow;' and they all formed a circle round the fire,while Diavolaccio disappeared. Carlini ate and drank as ifnothing had happened. The bandits looked on withastonishment at this singular conduct until they heardfootsteps. They turned round, and saw Diavolaccio bearingthe young girl in his arms. Her head hung back, and her longhair swept the ground. As they entered the circle, thebandits could perceive, by the firelight, the unearthlypallor of the young girl and of Diavolaccio. This apparitionwas so strange and so solemn, that every one rose, with theexception of Carlini, who remained seated, and ate and drankcalmly. Diavolaccio advanced amidst the most profoundsilence, and laid Rita at the captain's feet. Then every onecould understand the cause of the unearthly pallor in theyoung girl and the bandit. A knife was plunged up to thehilt in Rita's left breast. Every one looked at Carlini; thesheath at his belt was empty. `Ah, ah,' said the chief, `Inow understand why Carlini stayed behind.' All savagenatures appreciate a desperate deed. No other of the banditswould, perhaps, have done the same; but they all understoodwhat Carlini had done. `Now, then,' cried Carlini, rising inhis turn, and approaching the corpse, his hand on the buttof one of his pistols, `does any one dispute the possessionof this woman with me?' -- `No,' returned the chief, `she isthine.' Carlini raised her in his arms, and carried her outof the circle of firelight. Cucumetto placed his sentinelsfor the night, and the bandits wrapped themselves in theircloaks, and lay down before the fire. At midnight thesentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all were on thealert. It was Rita's father, who brought his daughter'sransom in person. `Here,' said he, to Cucumetto, `here arethree hundred piastres; give me back my child. But thechief, without taking the money, made a sign to him tofollow. The old man obeyed. They both advanced beneath thetrees, through whose branches streamed the moonlight.Cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed to two personsgrouped at the foot of a tree.

　　"`There,' said he, `demand thy child of Carlini; he willtell thee what has become of her;' and he returned to hiscompanions. The old man remained motionless; he felt thatsome great and unforeseen misfortune hung over his head. Atlength he advanced toward the group, the meaning of which hecould not comprehend. As he approached, Carlini raised hishead, and the forms of two persons became visible to the oldman's eyes. A woman lay on the ground, her head resting onthe knees of a man, who was seated by her; as he raised hishead, the woman's face became visible. The old manrecognized his child, and Carlini recognized the old man. `Iexpected thee,' said the bandit to Rita's father. --`Wretch!' returned the old man, `what hast thou done?' andhe gazed with terror on Rita, pale and bloody, a knifeburied in her bosom. A ray of moonlight poured through thetrees, and lighted up the face of the dead. -- `Cucumettohad violated thy daughter,' said the bandit; `I loved her,therefore I slew her; for she would have served as the sportof the whole band.' The old man spoke not, and grew pale asdeath. `Now,' continued Carlini, `if I have done wrongly,avenge her;' and withdrawing the knife from the wound inRita's bosom, he held it out to the old man with one hand,while with the other he tore open his vest. -- `Thou hastdone well!' returned the old man in a hoarse voice; `embraceme, my son.' Carlini threw himself, sobbing like a child,into the arms of his mistress's father. These were the firsttears the man of blood had ever wept. `Now,' said the oldman, `aid me to bury my child.' Carlini fetched twopickaxes; and the father and the lover began to dig at thefoot of a huge oak, beneath which the young girl was torepose. When the grave was formed, the father kissed herfirst, and then the lover; afterwards, one taking the head,the other the feet, they placed her in the grave. Then theyknelt on each side of the grave, and said the prayers of thedead. Then, when they had finished, they cast the earth overthe corpse, until the grave was filled. Then, extending hishand, the old man said; `I thank you, my son; and now leaveme alone.' -- `Yet' -- replied Carlini. -- `Leave me, Icommand you.' Carlini obeyed, rejoined his comrades, foldedhimself in his cloak, and soon appeared to sleep as soundlyas the rest. It had been resolved the night before to changetheir encampment. An hour before daybreak, Cucumetto arousedhis men, and gave the word to march. But Carlini would notquit the forest, without knowing what had become of Rita'sfather. He went toward the place where he had left him. Hefound the old man suspended from one of the branches of theoak which shaded his daughter's grave. He then took an oathof bitter vengeance over the dead body of the one and thetomb of the other. But he was unable to complete this oath,for two days afterwards, in an encounter with the Romancarbineers, Carlini was killed. There was some surprise,however, that, as he was with his face to the enemy, heshould have received a ball between his shoulders. Thatastonishment ceased when one of the brigands remarked to hiscomrades that Cucumetto was stationed ten paces in Carlini'srear when he fell. On the morning of the departure from theforest of Frosinone he had followed Carlini in the darkness,and heard this oath of vengeance, and, like a wise man,anticipated it. They told ten other stories of this banditchief, each more singular than the other. Thus, from Fondito Perusia, every one trembles at the name of Cucumetto.

　　"These narratives were frequently the theme of conversationbetween Luigi and Teresa. The young girl trembled very muchat hearing the stories; but Vampa reassured her with asmile, tapping the butt of his good fowling-piece, whichthrew its ball so well; and if that did not restore hercourage, he pointed to a crow, perched on some dead branch,took aim, touched the trigger, and the bird fell dead at thefoot of the tree. Time passed on, and the two young peoplehad agreed to be married when Vampa should be twenty andTeresa nineteen years of age. They were both orphans, andhad only their employers' leave to ask, which had beenalready sought and obtained. One day when they were talkingover their plans for the future, they heard two or threereports of firearms, and then suddenly a man came out of thewood, near which the two young persons used to graze theirflocks, and hurried towards them. When he came withinhearing, he exclaimed. `I am pursued; can you conceal me?'They knew full well that this fugitive must be a bandit; butthere is an innate sympathy between the Roman brigand andthe Roman peasant and the latter is always ready to aid theformer. Vampa, without saying a word, hastened to the stonethat closed up the entrance to their grotto, drew it away,made a sign to the fugitive to take refuge there, in aretreat unknown to every one, closed the stone upon him, andthen went and resumed his seat by Teresa. Instantlyafterwards four carbineers, on horseback, appeared on theedge of the wood; three of them appeared to be looking forthe fugitive, while the fourth dragged a brigand prisoner bythe neck. The three carbineers looked about carefully onevery side, saw the young peasants, and galloping up, beganto question them. They had seen no one. `That is veryannoying,' said the brigadier; for the man we are lookingfor is the chief.' -- `Cucumetto?' cried Luigi and Teresa atthe same moment.

　　"`Yes,' replied the brigadier; `and as his head is valued ata thousand Roman crowns, there would have been five hundredfor you, if you had helped us to catch him.' The two youngpersons exchanged looks. The brigadier had a moment's hope.Five hundred Roman crowns are three thousand lire, and threethousand lire are a fortune for two poor orphans who aregoing to be married.

　　"`Yes, it is very annoying,' said Vampa; `but we have notseen him.'

　　"Then the carbineers scoured the country in differentdirections, but in vain; then, after a time, theydisappeared. Vampa then removed the stone, and Cucumettocame out. Through the crevices in the granite he had seenthe two young peasants talking with the carbineers, andguessed the subject of their parley. He had read in thecountenances of Luigi and Teresa their steadfast resolutionnot to surrender him, and he drew from his pocket a pursefull of gold, which he offered to them. But Vampa raised hishead proudly; as to Teresa, her eyes sparkled when shethought of all the fine gowns and gay jewellery she couldbuy with this purse of gold.

　　"Cucumetto was a cunning fiend, and had assumed the form ofa brigand instead of a serpent, and this look from Teresashowed to him that she was a worthy daughter of Eve, and hereturned to the forest, pausing several times on his way,under the pretext of saluting his protectors. Several dayselapsed, and they neither saw nor heard of Cucumetto. Thetime of the Carnival was at hand. The Count of San-Feliceannounced a grand masked ball, to which all that weredistinguished in Rome were invited. Teresa had a greatdesire to see this ball. Luigi asked permission of hisprotector, the steward, that she and he might be presentamongst the servants of the house. This was granted. Theball was given by the Count for the particular pleasure ofhis daughter Carmela, whom he adored. Carmela was preciselythe age and figure of Teresa, and Teresa was as handsome asCarmela. On the evening of the ball Teresa was attired inher best, her most brilliant ornaments in her hair, andgayest glass beads, -- she was in the costume of the womenof Frascati. Luigi wore the very picturesque garb of theRoman peasant at holiday time. They both mingled, as theyhad leave to do, with the servants and peasants.

　　"The festa was magnificent; not only was the villabrilliantly illuminated, but thousands of colored lanternswere suspended from the trees in the garden; and very soonthe palace overflowed to the terraces, and the terraces tothe garden-walks. At each cross-path was an orchestra, andtables spread with refreshments; the guests stopped, formedquadrilles, and danced in any part of the grounds theypleased. Carmela was attired like a woman of Sonnino. Hercap was embroidered with pearls, the pins in her hair wereof gold and diamonds, her girdle was of Turkey silk, withlarge embroidered flowers, her bodice and skirt were ofcashmere, her apron of Indian muslin, and the buttons of hercorset were of jewels. Two of her companions were dressed,the one as a woman of Nettuno, and the other as a woman ofLa Riccia. Four young men of the richest and noblestfamilies of Rome accompanied them with that Italian freedomwhich has not its parallel in any other country in theworld. They were attired as peasants of Albano, Velletri,Civita-Castellana, and Sora. We need hardly add that thesepeasant costumes, like those of the young women, werebrilliant with gold and jewels.

　　"Carmela wished to form a quadrille, but there was one ladywanting. Carmela looked all around her, but not one of theguests had a costume similar to her own, or those of hercompanions. The Count of San-Felice pointed out Teresa, whowas hanging on Luigi's arm in a group of peasants. `Will youallow me, father?' said Carmela. -- `Certainly,' replied thecount, `are we not in Carnival time?' -- Carmela turnedtowards the young man who was talking with her, and saying afew words to him, pointed with her finger to Teresa. Theyoung man looked, bowed in obedience, and then went toTeresa, and invited her to dance in a quadrille directed bythe count's daughter. Teresa felt a flush pass over herface; she looked at Luigi, who could not refuse his assent.Luigi slowly relinquished Teresa's arm, which he had heldbeneath his own, and Teresa, accompanied by her elegantcavalier, took her appointed place with much agitation inthe aristocratic quadrille. Certainly, in the eyes of anartist, the exact and strict costume of Teresa had a verydifferent character from that of Carmela and her companions;and Teresa was frivolous and coquettish, and thus theembroidery and muslins, the cashmere waist-girdles, alldazzled her, and the reflection of sapphires and diamondsalmost turned her giddy brain.

　　"Luigi felt a sensation hitherto unknown arising in hismind. It was like an acute pain which gnawed at his heart,and then thrilled through his whole body. He followed withhis eye each movement of Teresa and her cavalier; when theirhands touched, he felt as though he should swoon; everypulse beat with violence, and it seemed as though a bellwere ringing in his ears. When they spoke, although Teresalistened timidly and with downcast eyes to the conversationof her cavalier, as Luigi could read in the ardent looks ofthe good-looking young man that his language was that ofpraise, it seemed as if the whole world was turning roundwith him, and all the voices of hell were whispering in hisears ideas of murder and assassination. Then fearing thathis paroxysm might get the better of him, he clutched withone hand the branch of a tree against which he was leaning,and with the other convulsively grasped the dagger with acarved handle which was in his belt, and which, unwittingly,he drew from the scabbard from time to time. Luigi wasjealous! He felt that, influenced by her ambitions andcoquettish disposition, Teresa might escape him.

　　"The young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soonrecovered herself. We have said that Teresa was handsome,but this is not all; Teresa was endowed with all those wildgraces which are so much more potent than our affected andstudied elegancies. She had almost all the honors of thequadrille, and if she were envious of the Count ofSan-Felice's daughter, we will not undertake to say thatCarmela was not jealous of her. And with overpoweringcompliments her handsome cavalier led her back to the placewhence he had taken her, and where Luigi awaited her. Twiceor thrice during the dance the young girl had glanced atLuigi, and each time she saw that he was pale and that hisfeatures were agitated, once even the blade of his knife,half drawn from its sheath, had dazzled her eyes with itssinister glare. Thus, it was almost tremblingly that sheresumed her lover's arm. The quadrille had been mostperfect, and it was evident there was a great demand for arepetition, Carmela alone objecting to it, but the Count ofSan-Felice besought his daughter so earnestly, that sheacceded. One of the cavaliers then hastened to inviteTeresa, without whom it was impossible for the quadrille tobe formed, but the young girl had disappeared. The truthwas, that Luigi had not felt the strength to support anothersuch trial, and, half by persuasion and half by force, hehad removed Teresa toward another part of the garden. Teresahad yielded in spite of herself, but when she looked at theagitated countenance of the young man, she understood by hissilence and trembling voice that something strange waspassing within him. She herself was not exempt from internalemotion, and without having done anything wrong, yet fullycomprehended that Luigi was right in reproaching her. Why,she did not know, but yet she did not the less feel thatthese reproaches were merited. However, to Teresa's greatastonishment, Luigi remained mute, and not a word escapedhis lips the rest of the evening. When the chill of thenight had driven away the guests from the gardens, and thegates of the villa were closed on them for the festain-doors, he took Teresa quite away, and as he left her ather home, he said, --

　　"`Teresa, what were you thinking of as you danced oppositethe young Countess of San-Felice?' -- `I thought,' repliedthe young girl, with all the frankness of her nature, `thatI would give half my life for a costume such as she wore.'

　　"`And what said your cavalier to you?' -- `He said it onlydepended on myself to have it, and I had only one word tosay.'

　　"`He was right,' said Luigi. `Do you desire it as ardentlyas you say?' -- `Yes.' -- `Well, then, you shall have it!'

　　"The young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look athim, but his face was so gloomy and terrible that her wordsfroze to her lips. As Luigi spoke thus, he left her. Teresafollowed him with her eyes into the darkness as long as shecould, and when he had quite disappeared, she went into thehouse with a sigh.

　　"That night a memorable event occurred, due, no doubt, tothe imprudence of some servant who had neglected toextinguish the lights. The Villa of San-Felice took fire inthe rooms adjoining the very apartment of the lovelyCarmela. Awakened in the night by the light of the flames,she sprang out of bed, wrapped herself in a dressing-gown,and attempted to escape by the door, but the corridor bywhich she hoped to fly was already a prey to the flames. Shethen returned to her room, calling for help as loudly as shecould, when suddenly her window, which was twenty feet fromthe ground, was opened, a young peasant jumped into thechamber, seized her in his arms, and with superhuman skilland strength conveyed her to the turf of the grass-plot,where she fainted. When she recovered, her father was by herside. All the servants surrounded her, offering herassistance. An entire wing of the villa was burnt down; butwhat of that, as long as Carmela was safe and uninjured? Herpreserver was everywhere sought for, but he did not appear;he was inquired after, but no one had seen him. Carmela wasgreatly troubled that she had not recognized him. As thecount was immensely rich, excepting the danger Carmela hadrun, -- and the marvellous manner in which she had escaped,made that appear to him rather a favor of providence than areal misfortune, -- the loss occasioned by the conflagrationwas to him but a trifle.

　　"The next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasantswere on the borders of the forest. Luigi arrived first. Hecame toward Teresa in high spirits, and seemed to havecompletely forgotten the events of the previous evening. Theyoung girl was very pensive, but seeing Luigi so cheerful,she on her part assumed a smiling air, which was natural toher when she was not excited or in a passion. Luigi took herarm beneath his own, and led her to the door of the grotto.Then he paused. The young girl, perceiving that there wassomething extraordinary, looked at him steadfastly.`Teresa,' said Luigi, `yesterday evening you told me youwould give all the world to have a costume similar to thatof the count's daughter.' -- `Yes,' replied Teresa withastonishment; `but I was mad to utter such a wish.' -- `AndI replied, "Very well, you shall have it."' -- `Yes,'replied the young girl, whose astonishment increased atevery word uttered by Luigi, `but of course your reply wasonly to please me.'

　　"`I have promised no more than I have given you, Teresa,'said Luigi proudly. `Go into the grotto and dress yourself.'At these words he drew away the stone, and showed Teresa thegrotto, lighted up by two wax lights, which burnt on eachside of a splendid mirror; on a rustic table, made by Luigi,were spread out the pearl necklace and the diamond pins, andon a chair at the side was laid the rest of the costume.

　　"Teresa uttered a cry of joy, and, without inquiring whencethis attire came, or even thanking Luigi, darted into thegrotto, transformed into a dressing-room. Luigi pushed thestone behind her, for on the crest of a small adjacent hillwhich cut off the view toward Palestrina, he saw a travelleron horseback, stopping a moment, as if uncertain of hisroad, and thus presenting against the blue sky that perfectoutline which is peculiar to distant objects in southernclimes. When he saw Luigi, he put his horse into a gallopand advanced toward him. Luigi was not mistaken. Thetraveller, who was going from Palestrina to Tivoli, hadmistaken his way; the young man directed him; but as at adistance of a quarter of a mile the road again divided intothree ways, and on reaching these the traveller might againstray from his route, he begged Luigi to be his guide. Luigithrew his cloak on the ground, placed his carbine on hisshoulder, and freed from his heavy covering, preceded thetraveller with the rapid step of a mountaineer, which ahorse can scarcely keep up with. In ten minutes Luigi andthe traveller reached the cross-roads. On arriving there,with an air as majestic as that of an emperor, he stretchedhis hand towards that one of the roads which the travellerwas to follow. -- "That is your road, excellency, and nowyou cannot again mistake.' -- `And here is your recompense,'said the traveller, offering the young herdsman some smallpieces of money.

　　"`Thank you,' said Luigi, drawing back his hand; `I render aservice, I do not sell it.' -- `Well,' replied thetraveller, who seemed used to this difference between theservility of a man of the cities and the pride of themountaineer, `if you refuse wages, you will, perhaps, accepta gift.' -- `Ah, yes, that is another thing.' -- `Then,'said the traveller, `take these two Venetian sequins andgive them to your bride, to make herself a pair ofearrings.'

　　"`And then do you take this poniard,' said the youngherdsman; `you will not find one better carved betweenAlbano and Civita-Castellana.'

　　"`I accept it,' answered the traveller, `but then theobligation will be on my side, for this poniard is worthmore than two sequins.' -- `For a dealer perhaps; but forme, who engraved it myself, it is hardly worth a piastre.'

　　"`What is your name?' inquired the traveller. -- `LuigiVampa,' replied the shepherd, with the same air as he wouldhave replied, Alexander, King of Macedon. -- `And yours?' --`I,' said the traveller, `am called Sinbad the Sailor.'"Franz d'Epinay started with surprise.

　　"Sinbad the Sailor." he said.

　　"Yes," replied the narrator; "that was the name which thetraveller gave to Vampa as his own."

　　"Well, and what may you have to say against this name?"inquired Albert; "it is a very pretty name, and theadventures of the gentleman of that name amused me very muchin my youth, I must confess." -- Franz said no more. Thename of Sinbad the Sailor, as may well be supposed, awakenedin him a world of recollections, as had the name of theCount of Monte Cristo on the previous evening.

　　"Proceed!" said he to the host.

　　"Vampa put the two sequins haughtily into his pocket, andslowly returned by the way he had gone. As he came withintwo or three hundred paces of the grotto, he thought heheard a cry. He listened to know whence this sound couldproceed. A moment afterwards he thought he heard his ownname pronounced distinctly. The cry proceeded from thegrotto. He bounded like a chamois, cocking his carbine as hewent, and in a moment reached the summit of a hill oppositeto that on which he had perceived the traveller. Three criesfor help came more distinctly to his ear. He cast his eyesaround him and saw a man carrying off Teresa, as Nessus, thecentaur, carried Dejanira. This man, who was hasteningtowards the wood, was already three-quarters of the way onthe road from the grotto to the forest. Vampa measured thedistance; the man was at least two hundred paces in advanceof him, and there was not a chance of overtaking him. Theyoung shepherd stopped, as if his feet had been rooted tothe ground; then he put the butt of his carbine to hisshoulder, took aim at the ravisher, followed him for asecond in his track, and then fired. The ravisher stoppedsuddenly, his knees bent under him, and he fell with Teresain his arms. The young girl rose instantly, but the man layon the earth struggling in the agonies of death. Vampa thenrushed towards Teresa; for at ten paces from the dying manher legs had failed her, and she had dropped on her knees,so that the young man feared that the ball that had broughtdown his enemy, had also wounded his betrothed. Fortunately,she was unscathed, and it was fright alone that had overcomeTeresa. When Luigi had assured himself that she was safe andunharmed, he turned towards the wounded man. He had justexpired, with clinched hands, his mouth in a spasm of agony,and his hair on end in the sweat of death. His eyes remainedopen and menacing. Vampa approached the corpse, andrecognized Cucumetto. From the day on which the bandit hadbeen saved by the two young peasants, he had been enamouredof Teresa, and had sworn she should be his. From that timehe had watched them, and profiting by the moment when herlover had left her alone, had carried her off, and believedhe at length had her in his power, when the ball, directedby the unerring skill of the young herdsman, had pierced hisheart. Vampa gazed on him for a moment without betraying theslightest emotion; while, on the contrary, Teresa,shuddering in every limb, dared not approach the slainruffian but by degrees, and threw a hesitating glance at thedead body over the shoulder of her lover. Suddenly Vampaturned toward his mistress: -- `Ah,' said he -- `good, good!You are dressed; it is now my turn to dress myself.'

　　"Teresa was clothed from head to foot in the garb of theCount of San-Felice's daughter. Vampa took Cucumetto's bodyin his arms and conveyed it to the grotto, while in her turnTeresa remained outside. If a second traveller had passed,he would have seen a strange thing, -- a shepherdesswatching her flock, clad in a cashmere grown, with ear-ringsand necklace of pearls, diamond pins, and buttons ofsapphires, emeralds, and rubies. He would, no doubt, havebelieved that he had returned to the times of Florian, andwould have declared, on reaching Paris, that he had met anAlpine shepherdess seated at the foot of the Sabine Hill. Atthe end of a quarter of an hour Vampa quitted the grotto;his costume was no less elegant than that of Teresa. He worea vest of garnet-colored velvet, with buttons of cut gold; asilk waistcoat covered with embroidery; a Roman scarf tiedround his neck; a cartridge-box worked with gold, and redand green silk; sky-blue velvet breeches, fastened above theknee with diamond buckles; garters of deerskin, worked witha thousand arabesques, and a hat whereon hung ribbons of allcolors; two watches hung from his girdle, and a splendidponiard was in his belt. Teresa uttered a cry of admiration.Vampa in this attire resembled a painting by Leopold Robert,or Schnetz. He had assumed the entire costume of Cucumetto.The young man saw the effect produced on his betrothed, anda smile of pride passed over his lips. -- `Now,' he said toTeresa, `are you ready to share my fortune, whatever it maybe?' -- `Oh, yes!' exclaimed the young girlenthusiastically. -- `And follow me wherever I go?' -- `Tothe world's end.' -- `Then take my arm, and let us on; wehave no time to lose.' -- The young girl did so withoutquestioning her lover as to where he was conducting her, forhe appeared to her at this moment as handsome, proud, andpowerful as a god. They went towards the forest, and soonentered it. We need scarcely say that all the paths of themountain were known to Vampa; he therefore went forwardwithout a moment's hesitation, although there was no beatentrack, but he knew his path by looking at the trees andbushes, and thus they kept on advancing for nearly an hourand a half. At the end of this time they had reached thethickest of the forest. A torrent, whose bed was dry, ledinto a deep gorge. Vampa took this wild road, which,enclosed between two ridges, and shadowed by the tuftedumbrage of the pines, seemed, but for the difficulties ofits descent, that path to Avernus of which Virgil speaks.Teresa had become alarmed at the wild and deserted look ofthe plain around her, and pressed closely against her guide,not uttering a syllable; but as she saw him advance witheven step and composed countenance, she endeavored torepress her emotion. Suddenly, about ten paces from them, aman advanced from behind a tree and aimed at Vampa. -- `Notanother step,' he said, `or you are a dead man.' -- `What,then,' said Vampa, raising his hand with a gesture ofdisdain, while Teresa, no longer able to restrain her alarm,clung closely to him, `do wolves rend each other?' -- `Whoare you?' inquired the sentinel. -- `I am Luigi Vampa,shepherd of the San-Felice farm.' -- `What do you want?' --`I would speak with your companions who are in the glade atRocca Bianca.' -- `Follow me, then,' said the sentinel; `or,as you know your way, go first.' -- Vampa smileddisdainfully at this precaution on the part of the bandit,went before Teresa, and continued to advance with the samefirm and easy step as before. At the end of ten minutes thebandit made them a sign to stop. The two young personsobeyed. Then the bandit thrice imitated the cry of a crow; acroak answered this signal. -- `Good!' said the sentry, `youmay now go on.' -- Luigi and Teresa again set forward; asthey went on Teresa clung tremblingly to her lover at thesight of weapons and the glistening of carbines through thetrees. The retreat of Rocca Bianca was at the top of a smallmountain, which no doubt in former days had been a volcano-- an extinct volcano before the days when Remus and Romulushad deserted Alba to come and found the city of Rome. Teresaand Luigi reached the summit, and all at once foundthemselves in the presence of twenty bandits. `Here is ayoung man who seeks and wishes to speak to you,' said thesentinel. -- `What has he to say?' inquired the young manwho was in command in the chief's absence. -- `I wish to saythat I am tired of a shepherd's life,' was Vampa's reply. --`Ah, I understand,' said the lieutenant; `and you seekadmittance into our ranks?' -- `Welcome!' cried severalbandits from Ferrusino, Pampinara, and Anagni, who hadrecognized Luigi Vampa. -- `Yes, but I came to ask somethingmore than to be your companion.' -- `And what may that be?'inquired the bandits with astonishment. -- `I come to ask tobe your captain,' said the young man. The bandits shoutedwith laughter. `And what have you done to aspire to thishonor?' demanded the lieutenant. -- `I have killed yourchief, Cucumetto, whose dress I now wear; and I set fire tothe villa San-Felice to procure a wedding-dress for mybetrothed.' An hour afterwards Luigi Vampa was chosencaptain, vice Cucumetto deceased."

　　"Well, my dear Albert," said Franz, turning towards hisfriend; "what think you of citizen Luigi Vampa?"

　　"I say he is a myth," replied Albert, "and never had anexistence."

　　"And what may a myth be?" inquired Pastrini.

　　"The explanation would be too long, my dear landlord,"replied Franz.

　　"And you say that Signor Vampa exercises his profession atthis moment in the environs of Rome?"

　　"And with a boldness of which no bandit before him ever gavean example."

　　"Then the police have vainly tried to lay hands on him?"

　　"Why, you see, he has a good understanding with theshepherds in the plains, the fishermen of the Tiber, and thesmugglers of the coast. They seek for him in the mountains,and he is on the waters; they follow him on the waters, andhe is on the open sea; then they pursue him, and he hassuddenly taken refuge in the islands, at Giglio, Guanouti,or Monte Cristo; and when they hunt for him there, hereappears suddenly at Albano, Tivoli, or La Riccia."

　　"And how does he behave towards travellers?"

　　"Alas! his plan is very simple. It depends on the distancehe may be from the city, whether he gives eight hours,twelve hours, or a day wherein to pay their ransom; and whenthat time has elapsed he allows another hour's grace. At thesixtieth minute of this hour, if the money is notforthcoming, he blows out the prisoner's brains with apistol-shot, or plants his dagger in his heart, and thatsettles the account."

　　"Well, Albert," inquired Franz of his companion, "are youstill disposed to go to the Colosseum by the outer wall?"

　　"Quite so," said Albert, "if the way be picturesque." Theclock struck nine as the door opened, and a coachmanappeared. "Excellencies," said he, "the coach is ready."

　　"Well, then," said Franz, "let us to the Colosseum."

　　"By the Porta del Popolo or by the streets, yourexcellencies?"

　　"By the streets, morbleu, by the streets!" cried Franz.

　　"Ah, my dear fellow," said Albert, rising, and lighting histhird cigar, "really, I thought you had more courage." Sosaying, the two young men went down the staircase, and gotinto the carriage.

　　Chapter 34The Colosseum.

　　Franz had so managed his route, that during the ride to theColosseum they passed not a single ancient ruin, so that nopreliminary impression interfered to mitigate the colossalproportions of the gigantic building they came to admire.The road selected was a continuation of the Via Sistina;then by cutting off the right angle of the street in whichstands Santa Maria Maggiore and proceeding by the Via Urbanaand San Pietro in Vincoli, the travellers would findthemselves directly opposite the Colosseum. This itinerarypossessed another great advantage, -- that of leaving Franzat full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon the subjectof Signor Pastrini's story, in which his mysterious host ofMonte Cristo was so strangely mixed up. Seated with foldedarms in a corner of the carriage, he continued to ponderover the singular history he had so lately listened to, andto ask himself an interminable number of questions touchingits various circumstances without, however, arriving at asatisfactory reply to any of them. One fact more than therest brought his friend "Sinbad the Sailor" back to hisrecollection, and that was the mysterious sort of intimacythat seemed to exist between the brigands and the sailors;and Pastrini's account of Vampa's having found refuge onboard the vessels of smugglers and fishermen, reminded Franzof the two Corsican bandits he had found supping so amicablywith the crew of the little yacht, which had even deviatedfrom its course and touched at Porto-Vecchio for the solepurpose of landing them. The very name assumed by his hostof Monte Cristo and again repeated by the landlord of theHotel de Londres, abundantly proved to him that his islandfriend was playing his philanthropic part on the shores ofPiombino, Civita-Vecchio, Ostia, and Gaeta, as on those ofCorsica, Tuscany, and Spain; and further, Franz bethoughthim of having heard his singular entertainer speak both ofTunis and Palermo, proving thereby how largely his circle ofacquaintances extended.

　　But however the mind of the young man might he absorbed inthese reflections, they were at once dispersed at the sightof the dark frowning ruins of the stupendous Colosseum,through the various openings of which the pale moonlightplayed and flickered like the unearthly gleam from the eyesof the wandering dead. The carriage stopped near the MetaSudans; the door was opened, and the young men, eagerlyalighting, found themselves opposite a cicerone, whoappeared to have sprung up from the ground, so unexpectedwas his appearance.

　　The usual guide from the hotel having followed them, theyhad paid two conductors, nor is it possible, at Rome, toavoid this abundant supply of guides; besides the ordinarycicerone, who seizes upon you directly you set foot in yourhotel, and never quits you while you remain in the city,there is also a special cicerone belonging to each monument-- nay, almost to each part of a monument. It may,therefore, be easily imagined there is no scarcity of guidesat the Colosseum, that wonder of all ages, which Martialthus eulogizes: "Let Memphis cease to boast the barbarousmiracles of her pyramids, and the wonders of Babylon betalked of no more among us; all must bow to the superiorityof the gigantic labor of the Caesars, and the many voices ofFame spread far and wide the surpassing merits of thisincomparable monument."

　　As for Albert and Franz, they essayed not to escape fromtheir ciceronian tyrants; and, indeed, it would have been somuch the more difficult to break their bondage, as theguides alone are permitted to visit these monuments withtorches in their hands. Thus, then, the young men made noattempt at resistance, but blindly and confidinglysurrendered themselves into the care and custody of theirconductors. Albert had already made seven or eight similarexcursions to the Colosseum, while his less favoredcompanion trod for the first time in his life the classicground forming the monument of Flavius Vespasian; and, tohis credit be it spoken, his mind, even amid the glibloquacity of the guides, was duly and deeply touched withawe and enthusiastic admiration of all he saw; and certainlyno adequate notion of these stupendous ruins can be formedsave by such as have visited them, and more especially bymoonlight, at which time the vast proportions of thebuilding appear twice as large when viewed by the mysteriousbeams of a southern moonlit sky, whose rays are sufficientlyclear and vivid to light the horizon with a glow equal tothe soft twilight of an eastern clime. Scarcely, therefore,had the reflective Franz walked a hundred steps beneath theinterior porticoes of the ruin, than, abandoning Albert tothe guides (who would by no means yield their prescriptiveright of carrying their victims through the routineregularly laid down, and as regularly followed by them, butdragged the unconscious visitor to the various objects witha pertinacity that admitted of no appeal, beginning, as amatter of course, with the Lions' Den, and finishing withCaesar's "Podium,"), to escape a jargon and mechanicalsurvey of the wonders by which he was surrounded, Franzascended a half-dilapidated staircase, and, leaving them tofollow their monotonous round, seated himself at the foot ofa column, and immediately opposite a large aperture, whichpermitted him to enjoy a full and undisturbed view of thegigantic dimensions of the majestic ruin.

　　Franz had remained for nearly a quarter of an hour perfectlyhidden by the shadow of the vast column at whose base he hadfound a resting-place, and from whence his eyes followed themotions of Albert and his guides, who, holding torches intheir hands, had emerged from a vomitarium at the oppositeextremity of the Colosseum, and then again disappeared downthe steps conducting to the seats reserved for the Vestalvirgins, resembling, as they glided along, some restlessshades following the flickering glare of so manyignes-fatui. All at once his ear caught a sound resemblingthat of a stone rolling down the staircase opposite the oneby which he had himself ascended. There was nothingremarkable in the circumstance of a fragment of granitegiving way and falling heavily below; but it seemed to himthat the substance that fell gave way beneath the pressureof a foot, and also that some one, who endeavored as much aspossible to prevent his footsteps from being heard, wasapproaching the spot where he sat. Conjecture soon becamecertainty, for the figure of a man was distinctly visible toFranz, gradually emerging from the staircase opposite, uponwhich the moon was at that moment pouring a full tide ofsilvery brightness.

　　The stranger thus presenting himself was probably a personwho, like Franz, preferred the enjoyment of solitude and hisown thoughts to the frivolous gabble of the guides. And hisappearance had nothing extraordinary in it; but thehesitation with which he proceeded, stopping and listeningwith anxious attention at every step he took, convincedFranz that he expected the arrival of some person. By a sortof instinctive impulse, Franz withdrew as much as possiblebehind his pillar. About ten feet from the spot where he andthe stranger were, the roof had given way, leaving a largeround opening, through which might be seen the blue vault ofheaven, thickly studded with stars. Around this opening,which had, possibly, for ages permitted a free entrance tothe brilliant moonbeams that now illumined the vast pile,grew a quantity of creeping plants, whose delicate greenbranches stood out in bold relief against the clear azure ofthe firmament, while large masses of thick, strong fibrousshoots forced their way through the chasm, and hung floatingto and fro, like so many waving strings. The person whosemysterious arrival had attracted the attention of Franzstood in a kind of half-light, that rendered it impossibleto distinguish his features, although his dress was easilymade out. He wore a large brown mantle, one fold of which,thrown over his left shoulder, served likewise to mask thelower part of his countenance, while the upper part wascompletely hidden by his broad-brimmed hat. The lower partof his dress was more distinctly visible by the bright raysof the moon, which, entering through the broken ceiling,shed their refulgent beams on feet cased in elegantly madeboots of polished leather, over which descended fashionablycut trousers of black cloth.

　　From the imperfect means Franz had of judging, he could onlycome to one conclusion, -- that the person whom he was thuswatching certainly belonged to no inferior station of life.Some few minutes had elapsed, and the stranger began to showmanifest signs of impatience, when a slight noise was heardoutside the aperture in the roof, and almost immediately adark shadow seemed to obstruct the flood of light that hadentered it, and the figure of a man was clearly seen gazingwith eager scrutiny on the immense space beneath him; then,as his eye caught sight of him in the mantle, he grasped afloating mass of thickly matted boughs, and glided down bytheir help to within three or four feet of the ground, andthen leaped lightly on his feet. The man who had performedthis daring act with so much indifference wore theTranstevere costume. "I beg your excellency's pardon forkeeping you waiting," said the man, in the Roman dialect,"but I don't think I'm many minutes after my time, teno'clock his just struck on the Lateran."

　　"Say not a word about being late," replied the stranger inpurest Tuscan; "'tis I who am too soon. But even if you hadcaused me to wait a little while, I should have felt quitesure that the delay was not occasioned by any fault ofyours."

　　"Your excellency is perfectly right in so thinking," saidthe man; "I came here direct from the Castle of St. Angelo,and I had an immense deal of trouble before I could get achance to speak to Beppo."

　　"And who is Beppo?"

　　"Oh, Beppo is employed in the prison, and I give him so mucha year to let me know what is going on within his holiness'scastle."

　　"Indeed! You are a provident person, I see."

　　"Why, you see, no one knows what may happen. Perhaps some ofthese days I may be entrapped, like poor Peppino and may bevery glad to have some little nibbling mouse to gnaw themeshes of my net, and so help me out of prison."

　　"Briefly, what did you glean?"

　　"That two executions of considerable interest will takeplace the day after to-morrow at two o'clock, as iscustomary at Rome at the commencement of all greatfestivals. One of the culprits will be mazzolato;* he is anatrocious villain, who murdered the priest who brought himup, and deserves not the smallest pity. The other suffereris sentenced to be decapitato;** and he, your excellency, ispoor Peppino."

　　* Knocked on the head.** Beheaded.

　　"The fact is, that you have inspired not only the pontificalgovernment, but also the neighboring states, with suchextreme fear, that they are glad of all opportunity ofmaking an example."

　　"But Peppino did not even belong to my band: he was merely apoor shepherd, whose only crime consisted in furnishing uswith provisions."

　　"Which makes him your accomplice to all intents andpurposes. But mark the distinction with which he is treated;instead of being knocked on the head as you would be if oncethey caught hold of you, he is simply sentenced to beguillotined, by which means, too, the amusements of the dayare diversified, and there is a spectacle to please everyspectator."

　　"Without reckoning the wholly unexpected one I am preparingto surprise them with."

　　"My good friend," said the man in the cloak, "excuse me forsaying that you seem to me precisely in the mood to commitsome wild or extravagant act."

　　"Perhaps I am; but one thing I have resolved on, and thatis, to stop at nothing to restore a poor devil to liberty,who has got into this scrape solely from having served me. Ishould hate and despise myself as a coward did I desert thebrave fellow in his present extremity."

　　"And what do you mean to do?"

　　"To surround the scaffold with twenty of my best men, who,at a signal from me, will rush forward directly Peppino isbrought for execution, and, by the assistance of theirstilettos, drive back the guard, and carry off theprisoner."

　　"That seems to me as hazardous as uncertain, and convincesme that my scheme is far better than yours."

　　"And what is your excellency's project?"

　　"Just this. I will so advantageously bestow 2,000 piastres,that the person receiving them shall obtain a respite tillnext year for Peppino; and during that year, anotherskilfully placed 1,000 piastres will afford him the means ofescaping from his prison."

　　"And do you feel sure of succeeding?"

　　"Pardieu!" exclaimed the man in the cloak, suddenlyexpressing himself in French.

　　"What did your excellency say?" inquired the other.

　　"I said, my good fellow, that I would do more single-handedby the means of gold than you and all your troop couldeffect with stilettos, pistols, carbines, and blunderbussesincluded. Leave me, then, to act, and have no fears for theresult."

　　"At least, there can be no harm in myself and party being inreadiness, in case your excellency should fail."

　　"None whatever. Take what precautions you please, if it isany satisfaction to you to do so; but rely upon my obtainingthe reprieve I seek."

　　"Remember, the execution is fixed for the day aftertomorrow, and that you have but one day to work in."

　　"And what of that? Is not a day divided into twenty-fourhours, each hour into sixty minutes, and every minutesub-divided into sixty seconds? Now in 86,400 seconds verymany things can be done."

　　"And how shall I know whether your excellency has succeededor not."

　　"Oh, that is very easily arranged. I have engaged the threelower windows at the Cafe Rospoli; should I have obtainedthe requisite pardon for Peppino, the two outside windowswill be hung with yellow damasks, and the centre with white,having a large cross in red marked on it."

　　"And whom will you employ to carry the reprieve to theofficer directing the execution?"

　　"Send one of your men, disguised as a penitent friar, and Iwill give it to him. His dress will procure him the means ofapproaching the scaffold itself, and he will deliver theofficial order to the officer, who, in his turn, will handit to the executioner; in the meantime, it will be as wellto acquaint Peppino with what we have determined on, if itbe only to prevent his dying of fear or losing his senses,because in either case a very useless expense will have beenincurred."

　　"Your excellency," said the man, "you are fully persuaded ofmy entire devotion to you, are you not?"

　　"Nay, I flatter myself that there can be no doubt of it,"replied the cavalier in the cloak.

　　"Well, then, only fulfil your promise of rescuing Peppino,and henceforward you shall receive not only devotion, butthe most absolute obedience from myself and those under methat one human being can render to another."

　　"Have a care how far you pledge yourself, my good friend,for I may remind you of your promise at some, perhaps, notvery distant period, when I, in my turn, may require youraid and influence."

　　"Let that day come sooner or later, your excellency willfind me what I have found you in this my heavy trouble; andif from the other end of the world you but write me word todo such or such a thing, you may regard it as done, for doneit shall be, on the word and faith of" --

　　"Hush!" interrupted the stranger; "I hear a noise."

　　"'Tis some travellers, who are visiting the Colosseum bytorchlight."

　　"'Twere better we should not be seen together; those guidesare nothing but spies, and might possibly recognize you;and, however I may be honored by your friendship, my worthyfriend, if once the extent of our intimacy were known, I amsadly afraid both my reputation and credit would sufferthereby."

　　"Well, then, if you obtain the reprieve?"

　　"The middle window at the Cafe Rospoli will be hung withwhite damask, bearing a red cross."

　　"And if you fail?"

　　"Then all three windows will have yellow draperies."

　　"And then?"

　　"And then, my good fellow, use your daggers in any way youplease, and I further promise you to be there as a spectatorof your prowess."

　　"We understand each other perfectly, then. Adieu, yourexcellency; depend upon me as firmly as I do upon you."

　　Saying these words, the Transteverin disappeared down thestaircase, while his companion, muffling his features moreclosely than before in the folds of his mantle, passedalmost close to Franz, and descended to the arena by anoutward flight of steps. The next minute Franz heard himselfcalled by Albert, who made the lofty building re-echo withthe sound of his friend's name. Franz, however, did not obeythe summons till he had satisfied himself that the two menwhose conversation he had overheard were at a sufficientdistance to prevent his encountering them in his descent. Inten minutes after the strangers had departed, Franz was onthe road to the Piazza de Spagni, listening with studiedindifference to the learned dissertation delivered byAlbert, after the manner of Pliny and Calpurnius, touchingthe iron-pointed nets used to prevent the ferocious beastsfrom springing on the spectators. Franz let him proceedwithout interruption, and, in fact, did not hear what wassaid; he longed to be alone, and free to ponder over allthat had occurred. One of the two men, whose mysteriousmeeting in the Colosseum he had so unintentionallywitnessed, was an entire stranger to him, but not so theother; and though Franz had been unable to distinguish hisfeatures, from his being either wrapped in his mantle orobscured by the shadow, the tones of his voice had made toopowerful an impression on him the first time he had heardthem for him ever again to forget them, hear them when orwhere he might. It was more especially when this man wasspeaking in a manner half jesting, half bitter, that Franz'sear recalled most vividly the deep sonorous, yetwell-pitched voice that had addressed him in the grotto ofMonte Cristo, and which he heard for the second time amidthe darkness and ruined grandeur of the Colosseum. And themore he thought, the more entire was his conviction, thatthe person who wore the mantle was no other than his formerhost and entertainer, "Sinbad the Sailor."

　　Under any other circumstances, Franz would have found itimpossible to resist his extreme curiosity to know more ofso singular a personage, and with that intent have sought torenew their short acquaintance; but in the present instance,the confidential nature of the conversation he had overheardmade him, with propriety, judge that his appearance at sucha time would be anything but agreeable. As we have seen,therefore, he permitted his former host to retire withoutattempting a recognition, but fully promising himself a richindemnity for his present forbearance should chance affordhim another opportunity. In vain did Franz endeavor toforget the many perplexing thoughts which assailed him; invain did he court the refreshment of sleep. Slumber refusedto visit his eyelids and the night was passed in feverishcontemplation of the chain of circumstances tending to provethe identity of the mysterious visitant to the Colosseumwith the inhabitant of the grotto of Monte Cristo; and themore he thought, the firmer grew his opinion on the subject.Worn out at length, he fell asleep at daybreak, and did notawake till late. Like a genuine Frenchman, Albert hademployed his time in arranging for the evening's diversion;he had sent to engage a box at the Teatro Argentino; andFranz, having a number of letters to write, relinquished thecarriage to Albert for the whole of the day. At five o'clockAlbert returned, delighted with his day's work; he had beenoccupied in leaving his letters of introduction, and hadreceived in return more invitations to balls and routs thanit would be possible for him to accept; besides this, he hadseen (as he called it) all the remarkable sights at Rome.Yes, in a single day he had accomplished what his moreserious-minded companion would have taken weeks to effect.Neither had he neglected to ascertain the name of the pieceto be played that night at the Teatro Argentino, and alsowhat performers appeared in it.

　　The opera of "Parisina" was announced for representation,and the principal actors were Coselli, Moriani, and LaSpecchia. The young men, therefore, had reason to considerthemselves fortunate in having the opportunity of hearingone of the best works by the composer of "Lucia diLammermoor," supported by three of the most renownedvocalists of Italy. Albert had never been able to endure theItalian theatres, with their orchestras from which it isimpossible to see, and the absence of balconies, or openboxes; all these defects pressed hard on a man who had hadhis stall at the Bouffes, and had shared a lower box at theOpera. Still, in spite of this, Albert displayed his mostdazzling and effective costumes each time he visited thetheatres; but, alas, his elegant toilet was wholly thrownaway, and one of the most worthy representatives of Parisianfashion had to carry with him the mortifying reflection thathe had nearly overrun Italy without meeting with a singleadventure.

　　Sometimes Albert would affect to make a joke of his want ofsuccess; but internally he was deeply wounded, and hisself-love immensely piqued, to think that Albert de Morcerf,the most admired and most sought after of any young personof his day, should thus be passed over, and merely have hislabor for his pains. And the thing was so much the moreannoying, as, according to the characteristic modesty of aFrenchman, Albert had quitted Paris with the full convictionthat he had only to show himself in Italy to carry allbefore him, and that upon his return he should astonish theParisian world with the recital of his numerouslove-affairs. Alas, poor Albert! none of those interestingadventures fell in his way; the lovely Genoese, Florentines,and Neapolitans were all faithful, if not to their husbands,at least to their lovers, and thought not of changing evenfor the splendid appearance of Albert de Morcerf; and all hegained was the painful conviction that the ladies of Italyhave this advantage over those of France, that they arefaithful even in their infidelity. Yet he could not restraina hope that in Italy, as elsewhere, there might be anexception to the general rule. Albert, besides being anelegant, well-looking young man, was also possessed ofconsiderable talent and ability; moreover, he was a viscount-- a recently created one, certainly, but in the present dayit is not necessary to go as far back as Noah in tracing adescent, and a genealogical tree is equally estimated,whether dated from 1399 or merely 1815; but to crown allthese advantages, Albert de Morcerf commanded an income of50,000 livres, a more than sufficient sum to render him apersonage of considerable importance in Paris. It wastherefore no small mortification to him to have visited mostof the principal cities in Italy without having excited themost trifling observation. Albert, however, hoped toindemnify himself for all these slights and indifferencesduring the Carnival, knowing full well that among thedifferent states and kingdoms in which this festivity iscelebrated, Rome is the spot where even the wisest andgravest throw off the usual rigidity of their lives, anddeign to mingle in the follies of this time of liberty andrelaxation.

　　The Carnival was to commence on the morrow; therefore Alberthad not an instant to lose in setting forth the programme ofhis hopes, expectations, and claims to notice. With thisdesign he had engaged a box in the most conspicuous part ofthe theatre, and exerted himself to set off his personalattractions by the aid of the most rich and elaboratetoilet. The box taken by Albert was in the first circle;although each of the three tiers of boxes is deemed equallyaristocratic, and is, for this reason, generally styled the"nobility's boxes," and although the box engaged for the twofriends was sufficiently capacious to contain at least adozen persons, it had cost less than would be paid at someof the French theatres for one admitting merely fouroccupants. Another motive had influenced Albert's selectionof his seat, -- who knew but that, thus advantageouslyplaced, he might not in truth attract the notice of somefair Roman, and an introduction might ensue that wouldprocure him the offer of a seat in a carriage, or a place ina princely balcony, from which he might behold the gayetiesof the Carnival? These united considerations made Albertmore lively and anxious to please than he had hitherto been.Totally disregarding the business of the stage, he leanedfrom his box and began attentively scrutinizing the beautyof each pretty woman, aided by a powerful opera-glass; but,alas, this attempt to attract notice wholly failed; not evencuriosity had been excited, and it was but too apparent thatthe lovely creatures, into whose good graces he was desirousof stealing, were all so much engrossed with themselves,their lovers, or their own thoughts, that they had not somuch as noticed him or the manipulation of his glass.

　　The truth was, that the anticipated pleasures of theCarnival, with the "holy week" that was to succeed it, sofilled every fair breast, as to prevent the least attentionbeing bestowed even on the business of the stage. The actorsmade their entries and exits unobserved or unthought of; atcertain conventional moments, the spectators would suddenlycease their conversation, or rouse themselves from theirmusings, to listen to some brilliant effort of Moriani's, awell-executed recitative by Coselli, or to join in loudapplause at the wonderful powers of La Specchia; but thatmomentary excitement over, they quickly relapsed into theirformer state of preoccupation or interesting conversation.Towards the close of the first act, the door of a box whichhad been hitherto vacant was opened; a lady entered to whomFranz had been introduced in Paris, where indeed, he hadimagined she still was. The quick eye of Albert caught theinvoluntary start with which his friend beheld the newarrival, and, turning to him, he said hastily, "Do you knowthe woman who has just entered that box?"

　　"Yes; what do you think of her?"

　　"Oh, she is perfectly lovely -- what a complexion! And suchmagnificent hair! Is she French?"

　　"No; a Venetian."

　　"And her name is -- "

　　"Countess G---- ."

　　"Ah, I know her by name!" exclaimed Albert; "she is said topossess as much wit and cleverness as beauty. I was to have

　　been presented to her when I met her at Madame Villefort'sball."

　　"Shall I assist you in repairing your negligence?" askedFranz.

　　"My dear fellow, are you really on such good terms with heras to venture to take me to her box?"

　　"Why, I have only had the honor of being in her society andconversing with her three or four times in my life; but youknow that even such an acquaintance as that might warrant mydoing what you ask." At that instant, the countess perceivedFranz, and graciously waved her hand to him, to which hereplied by a respectful inclination of the head. "Upon myword," said Albert, "you seem to be on excellent terms withthe beautiful countess."

　　"You are mistaken in thinking so," returned Franz calmly;"but you merely fall into the same error which leads so manyof our countrymen to commit the most egregious blunders, --I mean that of judging the habits and customs of Italy andSpain by our Parisian notions; believe me, nothing is morefallacious than to form any estimate of the degree ofintimacy you may suppose existing among persons by thefamiliar terms they seem upon; there is a similarity offeeling at this instant between ourselves and the countess-- nothing more."

　　"Is there, indeed, my good fellow? Pray tell me, is itsympathy of heart?"

　　"No; of taste," continued Franz gravely.

　　"And in what manner has this congeniality of mind beenevinced?"

　　"By the countess's visiting the Colosseum, as we did lastnight, by moonlight, and nearly alone."

　　"You were with her, then?"

　　"I was."

　　"And what did you say to her?"

　　"Oh, we talked of the illustrious dead of whom thatmagnificent ruin is a glorious monument!"

　　"Upon my word," cried Albert, "you must have been a veryentertaining companion alone, or all but alone, with abeautiful woman in such a place of sentiment as theColosseum, and yet to find nothing better a talk about thanthe dead! All I can say is, if ever I should get such achance, the living should be my theme."

　　"And you will probably find your theme ill-chosen."

　　"But," said Albert, breaking in upon his discourse, "nevermind the past; let us only remember the present. Are you notgoing to keep your promise of introducing me to the fairsubject of our remarks?"

　　"Certainly, directly the curtain falls on the stage."

　　"What a confounded time this first act takes. I believe, onmy soul, that they never mean to finish it."

　　"Oh, yes, they will; only listen to that charming finale.How exquisitely Coselli sings his part."

　　"But what an awkward, inelegant fellow he is."

　　"Well, then, what do you say to La Specchia? Did you eversee anything more perfect than her acting?"

　　"Why, you know, my dear fellow, when one has been accustomedto Malibran and Sontag, such singers as these don't make thesame impression on you they perhaps do on others."

　　"At least, you must admire Moriani's style and execution."

　　"I never fancied men of his dark, ponderous appearancesinging with a voice like a woman's."

　　"My good friend," said Franz, turning to him, while Albertcontinued to point his glass at every box in the theatre,"you seem determined not to approve; you are really toodifficult to please." The curtain at length fell on theperformances, to the infinite satisfaction of the Viscountof Morcerf, who seized his hat, rapidly passed his fingersthrough his hair, arranged his cravat and wristbands, andsignified to Franz that he was waiting for him to lead theway. Franz, who had mutely interrogated the countess, andreceived from her a gracious smile in token that he would bewelcome, sought not to retard the gratification of Albert'seager impatience, but began at once the tour of the house,closely followed by Albert, who availed himself of the fewminutes required to reach the opposite side of the theatreto settle the height and smoothness of his collar, and toarrange the lappets of his coat. This important task wasjust completed as they arrived at the countess's box. At theknock, the door was immediately opened, and the young manwho was seated beside the countess, in obedience to theItalian custom, instantly rose and surrendered his place tothe strangers, who, in turn, would be expected to retireupon the arrival of other visitors.

　　Franz presented Albert as one of the most distinguishedyoung men of the day, both as regarded his position insociety and extraordinary talents; nor did he say more thanthe truth, for in Paris and the circle in which the viscountmoved, he was looked upon and cited as a model ofperfection. Franz added that his companion, deeply grievedat having been prevented the honor of being presented to thecountess during her sojourn in Paris, was most anxious tomake up for it, and had requested him (Franz) to remedy thepast misfortune by conducting him to her box, and concludedby asking pardon for his presumption in having taken it uponhimself to do so. The countess, in reply, bowed gracefullyto Albert, and extended her hand with cordial kindness toFranz; then, inviting Albert to take the vacant seat besideher, she recommended Franz to take the next best, if hewished to view the ballet, and pointed to the one behind herown chair. Albert was soon deeply engrossed in discoursingupon Paris and Parisian matters, speaking to the countess ofthe various persons they both knew there. Franz perceivedhow completely he was in his element; and, unwilling tointerfere with the pleasure he so evidently felt, took upAlbert's glass, and began in his turn to survey theaudience. Sitting alone, in the front of a box immediatelyopposite, but situated on the third row, was a woman ofexquisite beauty, dressed in a Greek costume, whichevidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore it,was her national attire. Behind her, but in deep shadow, wasthe outline of a masculine figure; but the features of thislatter personage it was not possible to distinguish. Franzcould not forbear breaking in upon the apparentlyinteresting conversation passing between the countess andAlbert, to inquire of the former if she knew who was thefair Albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers was wellworthy of being observed by either sex. "All I can tellabout her," replied the countess, "is, that she has been atRome since the beginning of the season; for I saw her whereshe now sits the very first night of the season, and sincethen she has never missed a performance. Sometimes she isaccompanied by the person who is now with her, and at othersshe is merely attended by a black servant."

　　"And what do you think of her personal appearance?"

　　"Oh, I consider her perfectly lovely -- she is just my ideaof what Medora must have been."

　　Franz and the countess exchanged a smile, and then thelatter resumed her conversation with Albert, while Franzreturned to his previous survey of the house and company.The curtain rose on the ballet, which was one of thoseexcellent specimens of the Italian school, admirablyarranged and put on the stage by Henri, who has establishedfor himself a great reputation throughout Italy for histaste and skill in the choregraphic art -- one of thosemasterly productions of grace, method, and elegance in whichthe whole corps de ballet, from the principal dancers to thehumblest supernumerary, are all engaged on the stage at thesame time; and a hundred and fifty persons may be seenexhibiting the same attitude, or elevating the same arm orleg with a simultaneous movement, that would lead you tosuppose that but one mind, one act of volition, influencedthe moving mass -- the ballet was called "Poliska." Howevermuch the ballet might have claimed his attention, Franz wastoo deeply occupied with the beautiful Greek to take anynote of it; while she seemed to experience an almostchildlike delight in watching it, her eager, animated lookscontrasting strongly with the utter indifference of hercompanion, who, during the whole time the piece lasted,never even moved, not even when the furious, crashing dinproduced by the trumpets, cymbals, and Chinese bells soundedtheir loudest from the orchestra. Of this he took no heed,but was, as far as appearances might be trusted, enjoyingsoft repose and bright celestial dreams. The ballet atlength came to a close, and the curtain fell amid the loud,unanimous plaudits of an enthusiastic and delightedaudience.

　　Owing to the very judicious plan of dividing the two acts ofthe opera with a ballet, the pauses between the performancesare very short, the singers in the opera having time torepose themselves and change their costume, when necessary,while the dancers are executing their pirouettes andexhibiting their graceful steps. The overture to the secondact began; and, at the first sound of the leader's bowacross his violin, Franz observed the sleeper slowly ariseand approach the Greek girl, who turned around to say a fewwords to him, and then, leaning forward again on the railingof her box, she became as absorbed as before in what wasgoing on. The countenance of the person who had addressedher remained so completely in the shade, that, though Franztried his utmost, he could not distinguish a single feature.The curtain rose, and the attention of Franz was attractedby the actors; and his eyes turned from the box containingthe Greek girl and her strange companion to watch thebusiness of the stage.

　　Most of my readers are aware that the second act of"Parisina" opens with the celebrated and effective duet inwhich Parisina, while sleeping, betrays to Azzo the secretof her love for Ugo. The injured husband goes through allthe emotions of jealousy, until conviction seizes on hismind, and then, in a frenzy of rage and indignation, heawakens his guilty wife to tell her that he knows her guiltand to threaten her with his vengeance. This duet is one ofthe most beautiful, expressive and terrible conceptions thathas ever emanated from the fruitful pen of Donizetti. Franznow listened to it for the third time; yet it's notes, sotenderly expressive and fearfully grand as the wretchedhusband and wife give vent to their different griefs andpassions, thrilled through the soul of Franz with an effectequal to his first emotions upon hearing it. Excited beyondhis usual calm demeanor, Franz rose with the audience, andwas about to join the loud, enthusiastic applause thatfollowed; but suddenly his purpose was arrested, his handsfell by his sides, and the half-uttered "bravos" expired onhis lips. The occupant of the box in which the Greek girlsat appeared to share the universal admiration thatprevailed; for he left his seat to stand up in front, sothat, his countenance being fully revealed, Franz had nodifficulty in recognizing him as the mysterious inhabitantof Monte Cristo, and the very same person he had encounteredthe preceding evening in the ruins of the Colosseum, andwhose voice and figure had seemed so familiar to him. Alldoubt of his identity was now at an end; his singular hostevidently resided at Rome. The surprise and agitationoccasioned by this full confirmation of Franz's formersuspicion had no doubt imparted a corresponding expressionto his features; for the countess, after gazing with apuzzled look at his face, burst into a fit of laughter, andbegged to know what had happened. "Countess," returnedFranz, totally unheeding her raillery, "I asked you a shorttime since if you knew any particulars respecting theAlbanian lady opposite; I must now beseech you to inform mewho and what is her husband?"

　　"Nay," answered the countess, "I know no more of him thanyourself."

　　"Perhaps you never before noticed him?"

　　"What a question -- so truly French! Do you not know that weItalians have eyes only for the man we love?"

　　"True," replied Franz.

　　"All I call say is," continued the countess, taking up thelorgnette, and directing it toward the box in question,"that the gentleman, whose history I am unable to furnish,seems to me as though he had just been dug up; he looks morelike a corpse permitted by some friendly grave-digger toquit his tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of ours,than anything human. How ghastly pale he is!"

　　"Oh, he is always as colorless as you now see him," saidFranz.

　　"Then you know him?" almost screamed the countess. "Oh, praydo, for heaven's sake, tell us all about -- is he a vampire,or a resuscitated corpse, or what?"

　　"I fancy I have seen him before; and I even think herecognizes me."

　　"And I can well understand," said the countess, shrugging upher beautiful shoulders, as though an involuntary shudderpassed through her veins, "that those who have once seenthat man will never be likely to forget him." The sensationexperienced by Franz was evidently not peculiar to himself;another, and wholly uninterested person, felt the sameunaccountable awe and misgiving. "Well." inquired Franz,after the countess had a second time directed her lorgnetteat the box, "what do you think of our opposite neighbor?"

　　"Why, that he is no other than Lord Ruthven himself in aliving form." This fresh allusion to Byron* drew a smile toFranz's countenance; although he could but allow that ifanything was likely to induce belief in the existence ofvampires, it would be the presence of such a man as themysterious personage before him.

　　"I must positively find out who and what he is," said Franz,rising from his seat.

　　"No, no," cried the countess; "you must not leave me. Idepend upon you to escort me home. Oh, indeed, I cannotpermit you to go."

　　* Scott, of course: "The son of an ill-fated sire, and thefather of a yet more unfortunate family, bore in his looksthat cast of inauspicious melancholy by which thephysiognomists of that time pretended to distinguish thosewho were predestined to a violent and unhappy death." -- TheAbbot, ch. xxii.

　　"Is it possible," whispered Franz, "that you entertain anyfear?"

　　"I'll tell you," answered the countess. "Byron had the mostperfect belief in the existence of vampires, and evenassured me that he had seen them. The description he gave meperfectly corresponds with the features and character of theman before us. Oh, he is the exact personification of what Ihave been led to expect! The coal-black hair, large bright,glittering eyes, in which a wild, unearthly fire seemsburning, -- the same ghastly paleness. Then observe, too,that the woman with him is altogether unlike all others ofher sex. She is a foreigner -- a stranger. Nobody knows whoshe is, or where she comes from. No doubt she belongs to thesame horrible race he does, and is, like himself, a dealerin magical arts. I entreat of you not to go near him -- atleast to-night; and if to-morrow your curiosity stillcontinues as great, pursue your researches if you will; butto-night you neither can nor shall. For that purpose I meanto keep you all to myself." Franz protested he could notdefer his pursuit till the following day, for many reasons."Listen to me," said the countess, "and do not be so veryheadstrong. I am going home. I have a party at my houseto-night, and therefore cannot possibly remain till the endof the opera. Now, I cannot for one instant believe you sodevoid of gallantry as to refuse a lady your escort when sheeven condescends to ask you for it."

　　There was nothing else left for Franz to do but to take uphis hat, open the door of the box, and offer the countesshis arm. It was quite evident, by her manner, that heruneasiness was not feigned; and Franz himself could notresist a feeling of superstitious dread -- so much thestronger in him, as it arose from a variety of corroborativerecollections, while the terror of the countess sprang froman instinctive belief, originally created in her mind by thewild tales she had listened to till she believed themtruths. Franz could even feel her arm tremble as he assistedher into the carriage. Upon arriving at her hotel, Franzperceived that she had deceived him when she spoke ofexpecting company; on the contrary, her own return beforethe appointed hour seemed greatly to astonish the servants."Excuse my little subterfuge," said the countess, in replyto her companion's half-reproachful observation on thesubject; "but that horrid man had made me feel quiteuncomfortable, and I longed to be alone, that I mightcompose my startled mind." Franz essayed to smile. "Nay,"said she, "do not smile; it ill accords with the expressionof your countenance, and I am sure it does not spring fromyour heart. however, promise me one thing."

　　"What is it?"

　　"Promise me, I say."

　　"I will do anything you desire, except relinquish mydetermination of finding out who this man is. I have morereasons than you can imagine for desiring to know who he is,from whence he came, and whither he is going."

　　"Where he comes from I am ignorant; but I can readily tellyou where he is going to, and that is down below, withoutthe least doubt."

　　"Let us only speak of the promise you wished me to make,"said Franz.

　　"Well, then, you must give me your word to returnimmediately to your hotel, and make no attempt to followthis man to-night. There are certain affinities between thepersons we quit and those we meet afterwards. For heaven'ssake, do not serve as a conductor between that man and me.Pursue your chase after him to-morrow as eagerly as youplease; but never bring him near me, if you would not see medie of terror. And now, good-night; go to your rooms, andtry to sleep away all recollections of this evening. For myown part, I am quite sure I shall not be able to close myeyes." So saying, the countess quitted Franz, leaving himunable to decide whether she were merely amusing herself athis expense, or whether her fears and agitations weregenuine.

　　Upon his return to the hotel, Franz found Albert in hisdressing-gown and slippers, listlessly extended on a sofa,smoking a cigar. "My dear fellow." cried he, springing up,"is it really you? Why, I did not expect to see you beforeto-morrow."

　　"My dear Albert," replied Franz, "I am glad of thisopportunity to tell you, once and forever, that youentertain a most erroneous notion concerning Italian women.I should have thought the continual failures you have metwith in all your own love affairs might have taught youbetter by this time."

　　"Upon my soul, these women would puzzle the very Devil toread them aright. Why, here -- they give you their hand --they press yours in return -- they keep up a whisperingconversation -- permit you to accompany them home. Why, if aParisian were to indulge in a quarter of these marks offlattering attention, her reputation would be gone forever."

　　"And the very reason why the women of this fine country putso little restraint on their words and actions, is becausethey live so much in public, and have really nothing toconceal. Besides, you must have perceived that the countesswas really alarmed."

　　"At what? At the sight of that respectable gentleman sittingopposite to us in the same box with the lovely Greek girl?Now, for my part, I met them in the lobby after theconclusion of the piece; and hang me, if I can guess whereyou took your notions of the other world from. I can assureyou that this hobgoblin of yours is a deuced fine-lookingfellow -- admirably dressed. Indeed, I feel quite sure, fromthe cut of his clothes, they are made by a first-rate Paristailor -- probably Blin or Humann. He was rather too pale,certainly; but then, you know, paleness is always lookedupon as a strong proof of aristocratic descent anddistinguished breeding." Franz smiled; for he wellremembered that Albert particularly prided himself on theentire absence of color in his own complexion.

　　"Well, that tends to confirm my own ideas," said Franz,"that the countess's suspicions were destitute alike ofsense and reason. Did he speak in your hearing? and did youcatch any of his words?"

　　"I did; but they were uttered in the Romaic dialect. I knewthat from the mixture of Greek words. I don't know whether Iever told you that when I was at college I was rather --rather strong in Greek."

　　"He spoke the Romaic language, did he?"

　　"I think so."

　　"That settles it," murmured Franz. "'Tis he, past alldoubt."

　　"What do you say?"

　　"Nothing, nothing. But tell me, what were you thinking aboutwhen I came in?"

　　"Oh, I was arranging a little surprise for you."

　　"Indeed. Of what nature?"

　　"Why, you know it is quite impossible to procure acarriage."

　　"Certainly; and I also know that we have done all that humanmeans afforded to endeavor to get one."

　　"Now, then, in this difficulty a bright idea has flashedacross my brain." Franz looked at Albert as though he hadnot much confidence in the suggestions of his imagination."I tell you what, Sir Franz," cried Albert, "you deserve tobe called out for such a misgiving and incredulous glance asthat you were pleased to bestow on me just now."

　　"And I promise to give you the satisfaction of a gentlemanif your scheme turns out as ingenious as you assert."

　　"Well, then, hearken to me."

　　"I listen."

　　"You agree, do you not, that obtaining a carriage is out ofthe question?"

　　"I do."

　　"Neither can we procure horses?"

　　"True; we have offered any sum, but have failed."

　　"Well, now, what do you say to a cart? I dare say such athing might be had."

　　"Very possibly."

　　"And a pair of oxen?"

　　"As easily found as the cart."

　　"Then you see, my good fellow, with a cart and a couple ofoxen our business can be managed. The cart must betastefully ornamented; and if you and I dress ourselves asNeapolitan reapers, we may get up a striking tableau, afterthe manner of that splendid picture by Leopold Robert. Itwould add greatly to the effect if the countess would joinus in the costume of a peasant from Puzzoli or Sorrento. Ourgroup would then be quite complete, more especially as thecountess is quite beautiful enough to represent a madonna."

　　"Well," said Franz, "this time, Albert, I am bound to giveyou credit for having hit upon a most capital idea."

　　"And quite a national one, too," replied Albert withgratified pride. "A mere masque borrowed from our ownfestivities. Ha, ha, ye Romans! you thought to make us,unhappy strangers, trot at the heels of your processions,like so many lazzaroni, because no carriages or horses areto be had in your beggarly city. But you don't know us; whenwe can't have one thing we invent another."

　　"And have you communicated your triumphant idea to anybody?"

　　"Only to our host. Upon my return home I sent for him, and Ithen explained to him what I wished to procure. He assuredme that nothing would be easier than to furnish all Idesired. One thing I was sorry for; when I bade him have thehorns of the oxen gilded, he told me there would not betime, as it would require three days to do that; so you seewe must do without this little superfluity."

　　"And where is he now?"

　　"Who?"

　　"Our host."

　　"Gone out in search of our equipage, by to-morrow it mightbe too late."

　　"Then he will be able to give us an answer to-night."

　　"Oh, I expect him every minute." At this instant the dooropened, and the head of Signor Pastrini appeared."Permesso?" inquired he.

　　"Certainly -- certainly," cried Franz. "Come in, mine host."

　　"Now, then," asked Albert eagerly, "have you found thedesired cart and oxen?"

　　"Better than that!" replied Signor Pastrini, with the air ofa man perfectly well satisfied with himself.

　　"Take care, my worthy host," said Albert, "better is a sureenemy to well."

　　"Let your excellencies only leave the matter to me,"returned Signor Pastrini in a tone indicative of unboundedself-confidence.

　　"But what have you done?" asked Franz. "Speak out, there's aworthy fellow."

　　"Your excellencies are aware," responded the landlord,swelling with importance, "that the Count of Monte Cristo isliving on the same floor with yourselves!"

　　"I should think we did know it," exclaimed Albert, "since itis owing to that circumstance that we are packed into thesesmall rooms, like two poor students in the back streets ofParis."

　　"When, then, the Count of Monte Cristo, hearing of thedilemma in which you are placed, has sent to offer you seatsin his carriage and two places at his windows in the PalazzoRospoli." The friends looked at each other with unutterablesurprise.

　　"But do you think," asked Albert, "that we ought to acceptsuch offers from a perfect stranger?"

　　"What sort of person is this Count of Monte Cristo?" askedFranz of his host. "A very great nobleman, but whetherMaltese or Sicilian I cannot exactly say; but this I know,that he is noble as a Borghese and rich as a gold-mine."

　　"It seems to me," said Franz, speaking in an undertone toAlbert, "that if this person merited the high panegyrics ofour landlord, he would have conveyed his invitation throughanother channel, and not permitted it to be brought to us inthis unceremonious way. He would have written -- or" --

　　At this instant some one knocked at the door. "Come in,"said Franz. A servant, wearing a livery of considerablestyle and richness, appeared at the threshold, and, placingtwo cards in the landlord's hands, who forthwith presentedthem to the two young men, he said, "Please to deliverthese, from the Count of Monte Cristo to Viscomte Albert deMorcerf and M. Franz d'Epinay. The Count of Monte Cristo,"continued the servant, "begs these gentlemen's permission towait upon them as their neighbor, and he will be honored byan intimation of what time they will please to receive him."

　　"Faith, Franz," whispered Albert, "there is not much to findfault with here."

　　"Tell the count," replied Franz, "that we will do ourselvesthe pleasure of calling on him." The servant bowed andretired.

　　"That is what I call an elegant mode of attack," saidAlbert, "You were quite correct in what you said, SignorPastrini. The Count of Monte Cristo is unquestionably a manof first-rate breeding and knowledge of the world."

　　"Then you accept his offer?" said the host.

　　"Of course we do," replied Albert. "Still, I must own I amsorry to be obliged to give up the cart and the group ofreapers -- it would have produced such an effect! And wereit not for the windows at the Palazzo Rospoli, by way ofrecompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, I don'tknow but what I should have held on by my original plan.What say you, Franz?"

　　"Oh, I agree with you; the windows in the Palazzo Rospolialone decided me." The truth was, that the mention of twoplaces in the Palazzo Rospoli had recalled to Franz theconversation he had overheard the preceding evening in theruins of the Colosseum between the mysterious unknown andthe Transteverin, in which the stranger in the cloak hadundertaken to obtain the freedom of a condemned criminal;and if this muffled-up individual proved (as Franz felt surehe would) the same as the person he had just seen in theTeatro Argentino, then he should be able to establish hisidentity, and also to prosecute his researches respectinghim with perfect facility and freedom. Franz passed thenight in confused dreams respecting the two meetings he hadalready had with his mysterious tormentor, and in wakingspeculations as to what the morrow would produce. The nextday must clear up every doubt; and unless his near neighborand would-be friend, the Count of Monte Cristo, possessedthe ring of Gyges, and by its power was able to renderhimself invisible, it was very certain he could not escapethis time. Eight o'clock found Franz up and dressed, whileAlbert, who had not the same motives for early rising, wasstill soundly asleep. The first act of Franz was to summonhis landlord, who presented himself with his accustomedobsequiousness.

　　"Pray, Signor Pastrini," asked Franz, "is not some executionappointed to take place to-day?"

　　"Yes, your excellency; but if your reason for inquiry isthat you may procure a window to view it from, you are muchtoo late."

　　"Oh, no," answered Franz, "I had no such intention; and evenif I had felt a wish to witness the spectacle, I might havedone so from Monte Pincio -- could I not?"

　　"Ah!" exclaimed mine host, "I did not think it likely yourexcellency would have chosen to mingle with such a rabble asare always collected on that hill, which, indeed, theyconsider as exclusively belonging to themselves."

　　"Very possibly I may not go," answered Franz; "but in case Ifeel disposed, give me some particulars of to-day'sexecutions."

　　"What particulars would your excellency like to hear?"

　　"Why, the number of persons condemned to suffer, theirnames, and description of the death they are to die."

　　"That happens just lucky, your excellency! Only a fewminutes ago they brought me the tavolettas."

　　"What are they?"

　　"Sort of wooden tablets hung up at the corners of streetsthe evening before an execution, on which is pasted up apaper containing the names of the condemned persons, theircrimes, and mode of punishment. The reason for so publiclyannouncing all this is, that all good and faithful Catholicsmay offer up their prayers for the unfortunate culprits,and, above all, beseech of heaven to grant them a sincererepentance."

　　"And these tablets are brought to you that you may add yourprayers to those of the faithful, are they?" asked Franzsomewhat incredulously.

　　"Oh, dear, no, your excellency! I have not time foranybody's affairs but my own and those of my honorableguests; but I make an agreement with the man who pastes upthe papers, and he brings them to me as he would theplaybills, that in case any person staying at my hotelshould like to witness an execution, he may obtain everyrequisite information concerning the time and place etc."

　　"Upon my word, that is a most delicate attention on yourpart, Signor Pastrini," cried Franz.

　　"Why, your excellency," returned the landlord, chuckling andrubbing his hands with infinite complacency, "I think I maytake upon myself to say I neglect nothing to deserve thesupport and patronage of the noble visitors to this poorhotel."

　　"I see that plainly enough, my most excellent host, and youmay rely upon me to proclaim so striking a proof of yourattention to your guests wherever I go. Meanwhile, oblige meby a sight of one of these tavolettas."

　　"Nothing can be easier than to comply with your excellency'swish," said the landlord, opening the door of the chamber;"I have caused one to be placed on the landing, close byyour apartment." Then, taking the tablet from the wall, hehanded it to Franz, who read as follows: --

　　"`The public is informed that on Wednesday, February 23d,being the first day of the Carnival, executions will takeplace in the Piazza del Popolo, by order of the Tribunal ofthe Rota, of two persons, named Andrea Rondola, and Peppino,otherwise called Rocca Priori; the former found guilty ofthe murder of a venerable and exemplary priest, named DonCesare Torlini, canon of the church of St. John Lateran; andthe latter convicted of being an accomplice of the atrociousand sanguinary bandit, Luigi Vampa, and his band. Thefirst-named malefactor will be subjected to the mazzuola,the second culprit beheaded. The prayers of all goodChristians are entreated for these unfortunate men, that itmay please God to awaken them to a sense of their guilt, andto grant them a hearty and sincere repentance for theircrimes.'"

　　This was precisely what Franz had heard the evening beforein the ruins of the Colosseum. No part of the programmediffered, -- the names of the condemned persons, theircrimes, and mode of punishment, all agreed with his previousinformation. In all probability, therefore, the Transteverinwas no other than the bandit Luigi Vampa himself, and theman shrouded in the mantle the same he had known as "Sinbadthe Sailor," but who, no doubt, was still pursuing hisphilanthropic expedition in Rome, as he had already done atPorto-Vecchio and Tunis. Time was getting on, however, andFranz deemed it advisable to awaken Albert; but at themoment he prepared to proceed to his chamber, his friendentered the room in perfect costume for the day. Theanticipated delights of the Carnival had so run in his headas to make him leave his pillow long before his usual hour."Now, my excellent Signor Pastrini," said Franz, addressinghis landlord, "since we are both ready, do you think we mayproceed at once to visit the Count of Monte Cristo?"

　　"Most assuredly," replied he. "The Count of Monte Cristo isalways an early riser; and I can answer for his having beenup these two hours."

　　"Then you really consider we shall not be intruding if wepay our respects to him directly?"

　　"Oh, I am quite sure. I will take all the blame on myself ifyou find I have led you into an error."

　　"Well, then, if it be so, are you ready, Albert?"

　　"Perfectly."

　　"Let us go and return our best thanks for his courtesy."

　　"Yes, let us do so." The landlord preceded the friendsacross the landing, which was all that separated them fromthe apartments of the count, rang at the bell, and, upon thedoor being opened by a servant, said, "I signori Francesi."

　　The domestic bowed respectfully, and invited them to enter.They passed through two rooms, furnished in a luxuriousmanner they had not expected to see under the roof of SignorPastrini, and were shown into an elegantly fitted-updrawing-room. The richest Turkey carpets covered the floor,and the softest and most inviting couches, easy-chairs, andsofas, offered their high-piled and yielding cushions tosuch as desired repose or refreshment. Splendid paintings bythe first masters were ranged against the walls,intermingled with magnificent trophies of war, while heavycurtains of costly tapestry were suspended before thedifferent doors of the room. "If your excellencies willplease to be seated," said the man, "I will let the countknow that you are here."

　　And with these words he disappeared behind one of thetapestried portieres. As the door opened, the sound of aguzla reached the ears of the young men, but was almostimmediately lost, for the rapid closing of the door merelyallowed one rich swell of harmony to enter. Franz and Albertlooked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeousfurnishings of the apartment. Everything seemed moremagnificent at a second view than it had done at their firstrapid survey.

　　"Well," said Franz to his friend, "what think you of allthis?"

　　"Why, upon my soul, my dear fellow, it strikes me that ourelegant and attentive neighbor must either be somesuccessful stock-jobber who has speculated in the fall ofthe Spanish funds, or some prince travelling incog."

　　"Hush, hush!" replied Franz; "we shall ascertain who andwhat he is -- he comes!" As Franz spoke, he heard the soundof a door turning on its hinges, and almost immediatelyafterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the owner ofall these riches stood before the two young men. Albertinstantly rose to meet him, but Franz remained, in a manner,spellbound on his chair; for in the person of him who hadjust entered he recognized not only the mysterious visitantto the Colosseum, and the occupant of the box at the TeatroArgentino, but also his extraordinary host of Monte Cristo.

　　Chapter 35La Mazzolata.

　　"Gentlemen," said the Count of Monte Cristo as he entered,"I pray you excuse me for suffering my visit to beanticipated; but I feared to disturb you by presentingmyself earlier at your apartments; besides, you sent me wordthat you would come to me, and I have held myself at yourdisposal."

　　"Franz and I have to thank you a thousand times, count,"returned Albert; "you extricated us from a great dilemma,and we were on the point of inventing a very fantasticvehicle when your friendly invitation reached us."

　　"Indeed," returned the count, motioning the two young men tosit down. "It was the fault of that blockhead Pastrini, thatI did not sooner assist you in your distress. He did notmention a syllable of your embarrassment to me, when heknows that, alone and isolated as I am, I seek everyopportunity of making the acquaintance of my neighbors. Assoon as I learned I could in any way assist you, I mosteagerly seized the opportunity of offering my services." Thetwo young men bowed. Franz had, as yet, found nothing tosay; he had come to no determination, and as nothing in thecount's manner manifested the wish that he should recognizehim, he did not know whether to make any allusion to thepast, or wait until he had more proof; besides, althoughsure it was he who had been in the box the previous evening,he could not be equally positive that this was the man hehad seen at the Colosseum. He resolved, therefore, to letthings take their course without making any direct overtureto the count. Moreover, he had this advantage, he was masterof the count's secret, while the count had no hold on Franz,who had nothing to conceal. However, he resolved to lead theconversation to a subject which might possibly clear up hisdoubts.

　　"Count," said he, "you have offered us places in yourcarriage, and at your windows in the Rospoli Palace. Can youtell us where we can obtain a sight of the Piazza delPopolo?"

　　"Ah," said the count negligently, looking attentively atMorcerf, "is there not something like an execution upon thePiazza del Popolo?"

　　"Yes," returned Franz, finding that the count was coming tothe point he wished.

　　"Stay, I think I told my steward yesterday to attend tothis; perhaps I can render you this slight service also." Heextended his hand, and rang the bell thrice. "Did you everoccupy yourself," said he to Franz, "with the employment oftime and the means of simplifying the summoning yourservants? I have. When I ring once, it is for my valet;twice, for my majordomo; thrice, for my steward, -- thus Ido not waste a minute or a word. Here he is." A man of aboutforty-five or fifty entered, exactly resembling the smugglerwho had introduced Franz into the cavern; but he did notappear to recognize him. It was evident he had his orders."Monsieur Bertuccio," said the count, "you have procured mewindows looking on the Piazza del Popolo, as I ordered youyesterday "

　　"Yes, excellency," returned the steward; "but it was verylate."

　　"Did I not tell you I wished for one?" replied the count,frowning.

　　"And your excellency has one, which was let to PrinceLobanieff; but I was obliged to pay a hundred" --

　　"That will do -- that will do, Monsieur Bertuccio; sparethese gentlemen all such domestic arrangements. You have thewindow, that is sufficient. Give orders to the coachman; andbe in readiness on the stairs to conduct us to it." Thesteward bowed, and was about to quit the room. "Ah,"continued the count, "be good enough to ask Pastrini if hehas received the tavoletta, and if he can send us an accountof the execution."

　　"There is no need to do that," said Franz, taking out histablets; "for I saw the account, and copied it down."

　　"Very well, you can retire, M. Bertuccio; but let us knowwhen breakfast is ready. These gentlemen," added he, turningto the two friends, "will, I trust, do me the honor tobreakfast with me?"

　　"But, my dear count," said Albert, "we shall abuse yourkindness."

　　"Not at all; on the contrary, you will give me greatpleasure. You will, one or other of you, perhaps both,return it to me at Paris. M. Bertuccio, lay covers forthree." He then took Franz's tablets out of his hand. "`Weannounce,' he read, in the same tone with which he wouldhave read a newspaper, `that to-day, the 23d of February,will be executed Andrea Rondolo, guilty of murder on theperson of the respected and venerated Don Cesare Torlini,canon of the church of St. John Lateran, and Peppino, calledRocca Priori, convicted of complicity with the detestablebandit Luigi Vampa, and the men of his band.' Hum! `Thefirst will be mazzolato, the second decapitato.' Yes,"continued the count, "it was at first arranged in this way;but I think since yesterday some change has taken place inthe order of the ceremony."

　　"Really?" said Franz.

　　"Yes, I passed the evening at the Cardinal Rospigliosi's,and there mention was made of something like a pardon forone of the two men."

　　"For Andrea Rondolo?" asked Franz.

　　"No," replied the count, carelessly; "for the other (heglanced at the tablets as if to recall the name), forPeppino, called Rocca Priori. You are thus deprived ofseeing a man guillotined; but the mazzuola still remains,which is a very curious punishment when seen for the firsttime, and even the second, while the other, as you mustknow, is very simple. The mandaia* never fails, nevertrembles, never strikes thirty times ineffectually, like thesoldier who beheaded the Count of Chalais, and to whosetender mercy Richelieu had doubtless recommended thesufferer. Ah," added the count, in a contemptuous tone, "donot tell me of European punishments, they are in theinfancy, or rather the old age, of cruelty."

　　* Guillotine.

　　"Really, count," replied Franz, "one would think that youhad studied the different tortures of all the nations of theworld."

　　"There are, at least, few that I have not seen," said thecount coldly.

　　"And you took pleasure in beholding these dreadfulspectacles?"

　　"My first sentiment was horror, the second indifference, thethird curiosity."

　　"Curiosity -- that is a terrible word."

　　"Why so? In life, our greatest preoccupation is death; is itnot then, curious to study the different ways by which thesoul and body can part; and how, according to theirdifferent characters, temperaments, and even the differentcustoms of their countries, different persons bear thetransition from life to death, from existence toannihilation? As for myself, I can assure you of one thing,-- the more men you see die, the easier it becomes to dieyourself; and in my opinion, death may be a torture, but itis not an expiation."

　　"I do not quite understand you," replied Franz; "prayexplain your meaning, for you excite my curiosity to thehighest pitch."

　　"Listen," said the count, and deep hatred mounted to hisface, as the blood would to the face of any other. "If a manhad by unheard-of and excruciating tortures destroyed yourfather, your mother, your betrothed, -- a being who, whentorn from you, left a desolation, a wound that never closes,in your breast, -- do you think the reparation that societygives you is sufficient when it interposes the knife of theguillotine between the base of the occiput and the trapezalmuscles of the murderer, and allows him who has caused usyears of moral sufferings to escape with a few moments ofphysical pain?"

　　"Yes, I know," said Franz, "that human justice isinsufficient to console us; she can give blood in return forblood, that is all; but you must demand from her only whatit is in her power to grant."

　　"I will put another case to you," continued the count; "thatwhere society, attacked by the death of a person, avengesdeath by death. But are there not a thousand tortures bywhich a man may be made to suffer without society taking theleast cognizance of them, or offering him even theinsufficient means of vengeance, of which we have justspoken? Are there not crimes for which the impalement of theTurks, the augers of the Persians, the stake and the brandof the Iroquois Indians, are inadequate tortures, and whichare unpunished by society? Answer me, do not these crimesexist?"

　　"Yes," answered Franz; "and it is to punish them thatduelling is tolerated."

　　"Ah, duelling," cried the count; "a pleasant manner, upon mysoul, of arriving at your end when that end is vengeance! Aman has carried off your mistress, a man has seduced yourwife, a man has dishonored your daughter; he has renderedthe whole life of one who had the right to expect fromheaven that portion of happiness God his promised to everyone of his creatures, an existence of misery and infamy; andyou think you are avenged because you send a ball throughthe head, or pass a sword through the breast, of that manwho has planted madness in your brain, and despair in yourheart. And remember, moreover, that it is often he who comesoff victorious from the strife, absolved of all crime in theeyes of the world. No, no," continued the count, "had I toavenge myself, it is not thus I would take revenge."

　　"Then you disapprove of duelling? You would not fight aduel?" asked Albert in his turn, astonished at this strangetheory.

　　"Oh, yes," replied the count; "understand me, I would fighta duel for a trifle, for an insult, for a blow; and the moreso that, thanks to my skill in all bodily exercises, and theindifference to danger I have gradually acquired, I shouldbe almost certain to kill my man. Oh, I would fight for sucha cause; but in return for a slow, profound, eternaltorture, I would give back the same, were it possible; aneye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, as the Orientalistssay, -- our masters in everything, -- those favoredcreatures who have formed for themselves a life of dreamsand a paradise of realities."

　　"But," said Franz to the count, "with this theory, whichrenders you at once judge and executioner of your own cause,it would be difficult to adopt a course that would foreverprevent your falling under the power of the law. Hatred isblind, rage carries you away; and he who pours out vengeanceruns the risk of tasting a bitter draught."

　　"Yes, if he be poor and inexperienced, not if he be rich andskilful; besides, the worst that could happen to him wouldbe the punishment of which we have already spoken, and whichthe philanthropic French Revolution has substituted forbeing torn to pieces by horses or broken on the wheel. Whatmatters this punishment, as long as he is avenged? On myword, I almost regret that in all probability this miserablePeppino will not be beheaded, as you might have had anopportunity then of seeing how short a time the punishmentlasts, and whether it is worth even mentioning; but, reallythis is a most singular conversation for the Carnival,gentlemen; how did it arise? Ah, I recollect, you asked fora place at my window; you shall have it; but let us firstsit down to table, for here comes the servant to inform usthat breakfast is ready." As he spoke, a servant opened oneof the four doors of the apartment, saying -- "Al suocommodo!" The two young men arose and entered thebreakfast-room.

　　During the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served,Franz looked repeatedly at Albert, in order to observe theimpressions which he doubted not had been made on him by thewords of their entertainer; but whether with his usualcarelessness he had paid but little attention to him,whether the explanation of the Count of Monte Cristo withregard to duelling had satisfied him, or whether the eventswhich Franz knew of had had their effect on him alone, heremarked that his companion did not pay the least regard tothem, but on the contrary ate like a man who for the lastfour or five months had been condemned to partake of Italiancookery -- that is, the worst in the world. As for thecount, he just touched the dishes; he seemed to fulfil theduties of a host by sitting down with his guests, andawaited their departure to be served with some strange ormore delicate food. This brought back to Franz, in spite ofhimself, the recollection of the terror with which the counthad inspired the Countess G---- , and her firm convictionthat the man in the opposite box was a vampire. At the endof the breakfast Franz took out his watch. "Well," said thecount, "what are you doing?"

　　"You must excuse us, count," returned Franz, "but we havestill much to do."

　　"What may that be?"

　　"We have no masks, and it is absolutely necessary to procurethem."

　　"Do not concern yourself about that; we have, I think, aprivate room in the Piazza del Popolo; I will have whatevercostumes you choose brought to us, and you can dress there."

　　"After the execution?" cried Franz.

　　"Before or after, whichever you please."

　　"Opposite the scaffold?"

　　"The scaffold forms part of the fete."

　　"Count, I have reflected on the matter," said Franz, "Ithank you for your courtesy, but I shall content myself withaccepting a place in your carriage and at your window at theRospoli Palace, and I leave you at liberty to dispose of myplace at the Piazza del Popolo."

　　"But I warn you, you will lose a very curious sight,"returned the count.

　　"You will describe it to me," replied Franz, "and therecital from your lips will make as great an impression onme as if I had witnessed it. I have more than once intendedwitnessing an execution, but I have never been able to makeup my mind; and you, Albert?"

　　"I," replied the viscount, -- "I saw Castaing executed, butI think I was rather intoxicated that day, for I had quittedcollege the same morning, and we had passed the previousnight at a tavern."

　　"Besides, it is no reason because you have not seen anexecution at Paris, that you should not see one anywhereelse; when you travel, it is to see everything. Think what afigure you will make when you are asked, `How do theyexecute at Rome?' and you reply, `I do not know'! And,besides, they say that the culprit is an infamous scoundrel,who killed with a log of wood a worthy canon who had broughthim up like his own son. Diable, when a churchman is killed,it should be with a different weapon than a log, especiallywhen he has behaved like a father. If you went to Spain,would you not see the bull-fight? Well, suppose it is abull-fight you are going to see? Recollect the ancientRomans of the Circus, and the sports where they killed threehundred lions and a hundred men. Think of the eightythousand applauding spectators, the sage matrons who tooktheir daughters, and the charming Vestals who made with thethumb of their white hands the fatal sign that said, `Come,despatch the dying.'"

　　"Shall you go, then, Albert?" asked Franz.

　　"Ma foi, yes; like you, I hesitated, but the count'seloquence decides me."

　　"Let us go, then," said Franz, "since you wish it; but onour way to the Piazza del Popolo, I wish to pass through theCorso. Is this possible, count?"

　　"On foot, yes, in a carriage, no."

　　"I will go on foot, then."

　　"Is it important that you should go that way?"

　　"Yes, there is something I wish to see."

　　"Well, we will go by the Corso. We will send the carriage towait for us on the Piazza del Popolo, by the Strada delBabuino, for I shall be glad to pass, myself, through theCorso, to see if some orders I have given have beenexecuted."

　　"Excellency," said a servant, opening the door, "a man inthe dress of a penitent wishes to speak to you."

　　"Ah, yes" returned the count, "I know who he is, gentlemen;will you return to the salon? you will find good cigars onthe centre table. I will be with you directly." The youngmen rose and returned into the salon, while the count, againapologizing, left by another door. Albert, who was a greatsmoker, and who had considered it no small sacrifice to bedeprived of the cigars of the Cafe de Paris, approached thetable, and uttered a cry of joy at perceiving some veritablepuros.

　　"Well," asked Franz, "what think you of the Count of MonteCristo?"

　　"What do I think?" said Albert, evidently surprised at sucha question from his companion; "I think he is a delightfulfellow, who does the honors of his table admirably; who hastravelled much, read much, is, like Brutus, of the Stoicschool, and moreover," added he, sending a volume of smokeup towards the ceiling, "that he has excellent cigars." Suchwas Albert's opinion of the count, and as Franz well knewthat Albert professed never to form an opinion except uponlong reflection, he made no attempt to change it. "But,"said he, "did you observe one very singular thing?"

　　"What?"

　　"How attentively he looked at you."

　　"At me?"

　　"Yes." -- Albert reflected. "Ah," replied he, sighing, "thatis not very surprising; I have been more than a year absentfrom Paris, and my clothes are of a most antiquated cut; thecount takes me for a provincial. The first opportunity youhave, undeceive him, I beg, and tell him I am nothing of thekind." Franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.

　　"I am now quite at your service, gentlemen," said he. "Thecarriage is going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and wewill go another; and, if you please, by the Corso. Take somemore of these cigars, M. de Morcerf."

　　"With all my heart," returned Albert; "Italian cigars arehorrible. When you come to Paris, I will return all this."

　　"I will not refuse; I intend going there soon, and since youallow me, I will pay you a visit. Come, we have not any timeto lose, it is half-past twelve -- let us set off." Allthree descended; the coachman received his master's orders,and drove down the Via del Babuino. While the threegentlemen walked along the Piazza de Spagni and the ViaFrattina, which led directly between the Fiano and Rospolipalaces, Franz's attention was directed towards the windowsof that last palace, for he had not forgotten the signalagreed upon between the man in the mantle and theTranstevere peasant. "Which are your windows?" asked he ofthe count, with as much indifference as he could assume."The three last," returned he, with a negligence evidentlyunaffected, for he could not imagine with what intention thequestion was put. Franz glanced rapidly towards the threewindows. The side windows were hung with yellow damask, andthe centre one with white damask and a red cross. The man inthe mantle had kept his promise to the Transteverin, andthere could now be no doubt that he was the count. The threewindows were still untenanted. Preparations were making onevery side; chairs were placed, scaffolds were raised, andwindows were hung with flags. The masks could not appear;the carriages could not move about; but the masks werevisible behind the windows, the carriages, and the doors.

　　Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso.As they approached the Piazza del Popolo, the crowd becamemore dense, and above the heads of the multitude two objectswere visible: the obelisk, surmounted by a cross, whichmarks the centre of the square, and in front of the obelisk,at the point where the three streets, del Babuino, delCorso, and di Ripetta, meet, the two uprights of thescaffold, between which glittered the curved knife of themandaia. At the corner of the street they met the count'ssteward, who was awaiting his master. The window, let at anexorbitant price, which the count had doubtless wished toconceal from his guests, was on the second floor of thegreat palace, situated between the Via del Babuino and theMonte Pincio. It consisted, as we have said, of a smalldressing-room, opening into a bedroom, and, when the door ofcommunication was shut, the inmates were quite alone. Onchairs were laid elegant masquerade costumes of blue andwhite satin. "As you left the choice of your costumes tome," said the count to the two friends, "I have had thesebrought, as they will be the most worn this year; and theyare most suitable, on account of the confetti (sweetmeats),as they do not show the flour."

　　Franz heard the words of the count but imperfectly, and heperhaps did not fully appreciate this new attention to theirwishes; for he was wholly absorbed by the spectacle that thePiazza del Popolo presented, and by the terrible instrumentthat was in the centre. It was the first time Franz had everseen a guillotine, -- we say guillotine, because the Romanmandaia is formed on almost the same model as the Frenchinstrument.* The knife, which is shaped like a crescent,that cuts with the convex side, falls from a less height,and that is all the difference. Two men, seated on themovable plank on which the victim is laid, were eating theirbreakfasts, while waiting for the criminal. Their repastconsisted apparently of bread and sausages. One of themlifted the plank, took out a flask of wine, drank some, andthen passed it to his companion. These two men were theexecutioner's assistants. At this sight Franz felt theperspiration start forth upon his brow. The prisoners,transported the previous evening from the Carcere Nuovo tothe little church of Santa Maria del Popolo, had passed thenight, each accompanied by two priests, in a chapel closedby a grating, before which were two sentinels, who wererelieved at intervals. A double line of carbineers, placedon each side of the door of the church, reached to thescaffold, and formed a circle around it, leaving a pathabout ten feet wide, and around the guillotine a space ofnearly a hundred feet. All the rest of the square was pavedwith heads. Many women held their infants on theirshoulders, and thus the children had the best view. TheMonte Pincio seemed a vast amphitheatre filled withspectators; the balconies of the two churches at the cornerof the Via del Babuino and the Via di Ripetta were crammed;the steps even seemed a parti-colored sea, that was impelledtowards the portico; every niche in the wall held its livingstatue. What the count said was true -- the most curiousspectacle in life is that of death. And yet, instead of thesilence and the solemnity demanded by the occasion, laughterand jests arose from the crowd. It was evident that theexecution was, in the eyes of the people, only thecommencement of the Carnival. Suddenly the tumult ceased, asif by magic, and the doors of the church opened. Abrotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robesof gray sackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding intheir hands lighted tapers, appeared first; the chiefmarched at the head. Behind the penitents came a man of vaststature and proportions. He was naked, with the exception ofcloth drawers at the left side of which hung a large knifein a sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a heavy ironsledge-hammer. This man was the executioner. He had,moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords. Behind theexecutioner came, in the order in which they were to die,first Peppino and then Andrea. Each was accompanied by twopriests. Neither had his eyes bandaged. Peppino walked witha firm step, doubtless aware of what awaited him. Andrea wassupported by two priests. Each of them, from time to time,kissed the crucifix a confessor held out to them. At thissight alone Franz felt his legs tremble under him. He lookedat Albert -- he was as white as his shirt, and mechanicallycast away his cigar, although he had not half smoked it. Thecount alone seemed unmoved -- nay, more, a slight colorseemed striving to rise in his pale cheeks. His nostrilsdilated like those of a wild beast that scents its prey, andhis lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small andsharp like those of a jackal. And yet his features wore anexpression of smiling tenderness, such as Franz had neverbefore witnessed in them; his black eyes especially werefull of kindness and pity. However, the two culpritsadvanced, and as they approached their faces became visible.Peppino was a handsome young man of four or five and twenty,bronzed by the sun; he carried his head erect, and seemed onthe watch to see on which side his liberator would appear.Andrea was short and fat; his visage, marked with brutalcruelty, did not indicate age; he might be thirty. In prisonhe had suffered his beard to grow; his head fell on hisshoulder, his legs bent beneath him, and his movements wereapparently automatic and unconscious.

　　* Dr. Guillotin got the idea of his famous machine fromwitnessing an execution in Italy.

　　"I thought," said Franz to the count, "that you told methere would be but one execution."

　　"I told you true," replied he coldly.

　　"And yet here are two culprits."

　　"Yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the otherhas many years to live."

　　"If the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose."

　　"And see, here it is," said the count. At the moment whenPeppino reached the foot of the mandaia, a priest arrived insome haste, forced his way through the soldiers, and,advancing to the chief of the brotherhood, gave him a foldedpaper. The piercing eye of Peppino had noticed all. Thechief took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his hand,"Heaven be praised, and his holiness also," said he in aloud voice; "here is a pardon for one of the prisoners!"

　　"A pardon!" cried the people with one voice -- "a pardon!"At this cry Andrea raised his head. "Pardon for whom?" criedhe.

　　Peppino remained breathless. "A pardon for Peppino, calledRocca Priori," said the principal friar. And he passed thepaper to the officer commanding the carbineers, who read andreturned it to him.

　　"For Peppino!" cried Andrea, who seemed roused from thetorpor in which he had been plunged. "Why for him and notfor me? We ought to die together. I was promised he shoulddie with me. You have no right to put me to death alone. Iwill not die alone -- I will not!" And he broke from thepriests struggling and raving like a wild beast, andstriving desperately to break the cords that bound hishands. The executioner made a sign, and his two assistantsleaped from the scaffold and seized him. "What is going on?"asked Franz of the count; for, as all the talk was in theRoman dialect, he had not perfectly understood it. "Do younot see?" returned the count, "that this human creature whois about to die is furious that his fellow-sufferer does notperish with him? and, were he able, he would rather tear himto pieces with his teeth and nails than let him enjoy thelife he himself is about to be deprived of. Oh, man, man --race of crocodiles," cried the count, extending his clinchedhands towards the crowd, "how well do I recognize you there,and that at all times you are worthy of yourselves!"Meanwhile Andrea and the two executioners were struggling onthe ground, and he kept exclaiming, "He ought to die! -- heshall die! -- I will not die alone!"

　　"Look, look," cried the count. seizing the young men's hands-- "look, for on my soul it is curious. Here is a man whohad resigned himself to his fate, who was going to thescaffold to die -- like a coward, it is true, but he wasabout to die without resistance. Do you know what gave himstrength? -- do you know what consoled him? It was, thatanother partook of his punishment -- that another partook ofhis anguish -- that another was to die before him. Lead twosheep to the butcher's, two oxen to the slaughterhouse, andmake one of them understand that his companion will not die;the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will bellow withjoy. But man -- man, whom God created in his own image --man, upon whom God has laid his first, his sole commandment,to love his neighbor -- man, to whom God has given a voiceto express his thoughts -- what is his first cry when hehears his fellow-man is saved? A blasphemy. Honor to man,this masterpiece of nature, this king of the creation!" Andthe count burst into a laugh; a terrible laugh, that showedhe must have suffered horribly to be able thus to laugh.However, the struggle still continued, and it was dreadfulto witness. The people all took part against Andrea, andtwenty thousand voices cried, "Put him to death! put him todeath!" Franz sprang back, but the count seized his arm, andheld him before the window. "What are you doing?" said he."Do you pity him? If you heard the cry of `Mad dog!' youwould take your gun -- you would unhesitatingly shoot thepoor beast, who, after all, was only guilty of having beenbitten by another dog. And yet you pity a man who, withoutbeing bitten by one of his race, has yet murdered hisbenefactor; and who, now unable to kill any one, because hishands are bound, wishes to see his companion in captivityperish. No, no -- look, look!"

　　The command was needless. Franz was fascinated by thehorribly spectacle. The two assistants had borne Andrea tothe scaffold, and there, in spite of his struggles, hisbites, and his cries, had forced him to his knees. Duringthis time the executioner had raised his mace, and signed tothem to get out of the way; the criminal strove to rise,but, ere he had time, the mace fell on his left temple. Adull and heavy sound was heard, and the man dropped like anox on his face, and then turned over on his back. Theexecutioner let fall his mace, drew his knife, and with onestroke opened his throat, and mounting on his stomach,stamped violently on it with his feet. At every stroke a jetof blood sprang from the wound.

　　This time Franz could contain himself no longer, but sank,half fainting, into a seat. Albert, with his eyes closed,was standing grasping the window-curtains. The count waserect and triumphant, like the Avenging Angel!

　　Chapter 36The Carnival at Rome.

　　When Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert drinking aglass of water, of which, to judge from his pallor, he stoodin great need; and the count, who was assuming hismasquerade costume. He glanced mechanically towards thesquare -- the scene was wholly changed; scaffold,executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the peopleremained, full of noise and excitement. The bell of MonteCitorio, which only sounds on the pope's decease and theopening of the Carnival, was ringing a joyous peal. "Well,"asked he of the count, "what has, then, happened?"

　　"Nothing," replied the count; "only, as you see, theCarnival his commenced. Make haste and dress yourself."

　　"In fact," said Franz, "this horrible scene has passed awaylike a dream."

　　"It is but a dream, a nightmare, that has disturbed you."

　　"Yes, that I have suffered; but the culprit?"

　　"That is a dream also; only he has remained asleep, whileyou have awakened; and who knows which of you is the mostfortunate?"

　　"But Peppino -- what has become of him?"

　　"Peppino is a lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who arehappy in proportion as they are noticed, was delighted tosee that the general attention was directed towards hiscompanion. He profited by this distraction to slip awayamong the crowd, without even thanking the worthy priestswho accompanied him. Decidedly man is an ungrateful andegotistical animal. But dress yourself; see, M. de Morcerfsets you the example." Albert was drawing on the satinpantaloon over his black trousers and varnished boots."Well, Albert," said Franz, "do you feel much inclined tojoin the revels? Come, answer frankly."

　　"Ma foi, no," returned Albert. "But I am really glad to haveseen such a sight; and I understand what the count said --that when you have once habituated yourself to a similarspectacle, it is the only one that causes you any emotion."

　　"Without reflecting that this is the only moment in whichyou can study character," said the count; "on the steps ofthe scaffold death tears off the mask that has been wornthrough life, and the real visage is disclosed. It must beallowed that Andrea was not very handsome, the hideousscoundrel! Come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dressyourselves." Franz felt it would be ridiculous not to followhis two companions' example. He assumed his costume, andfastened on the mask that scarcely equalled the pallor ofhis own face. Their toilet finished, they descended; thecarriage awaited them at the door, filled with sweetmeatsand bouquets. They fell into the line of carriages. It isdifficult to form an idea of the perfect change that hadtaken place. Instead of the spectacle of gloomy and silentdeath, the Piazza del Popolo presented a spectacle of gayand noisy mirth and revelry. A crowd of masks flowed in fromall sides, emerging from the doors, descending from thewindows. From every street and every corner drove carriagesfilled with clowns, harlequins, dominoes, mummers,pantomimists, Transteverins, knights, and peasants,screaming, fighting, gesticulating, throwing eggs filledwith flour, confetti, nosegays, attacking, with theirsarcasms and their missiles, friends and foes, companionsand strangers, indiscriminately, and no one took offence, ordid anything but laugh. Franz and Albert were like men who,to drive away a violent sorrow, have recourse to wine, andwho, as they drink and become intoxicated, feel a thick veildrawn between the past and the present. They saw, or rathercontinued to see, the image of what they had witnessed; butlittle by little the general vertigo seized them, and theyfelt themselves obliged to take part in the noise andconfusion. A handful of confetti that came from aneighboring carriage, and which, while it covered Morcerfand his two companions with dust, pricked his neck and thatportion of his face uncovered by his mask like a hundredpins, incited him to join in the general combat, in whichall the masks around him were engaged. He rose in his turn,and seizing handfuls of confetti and sweetmeats, with whichthe carriage was filled, cast them with all the force andskill he was master of.

　　The strife had fairly begun, and the recollection of whatthey had seen half an hour before was gradually effaced fromthe young men's minds, so much were they occupied by the gayand glittering procession they now beheld. As for the Countof Monte Cristo, he had never for an instant shown anyappearance of having been moved. Imagine the large andsplendid Corso, bordered from one end to the other withlofty palaces, with their balconies hung with carpets, andtheir windows with flags. At these balconies are threehundred thousand spectators -- Romans, Italians, strangersfrom all parts of the world, the united aristocracy ofbirth, wealth, and genius. Lovely women, yielding to theinfluence of the scene, bend over their balconies, or leanfrom their windows, and shower down confetti, which arereturned by bouquets; the air seems darkened with thefalling confetti and flying flowers. In the streets thelively crowd is dressed in the most fantastic costumes --gigantic cabbages walk gravely about, buffaloes' heads belowfrom men's shoulders, dogs walk on their hind legs; in themidst of all this a mask is lifted, and, as in Callot'sTemptation of St. Anthony, a lovely face is exhibited, whichwe would fain follow, but from which we are separated bytroops of fiends. This will give a faint idea of theCarnival at Rome. At the second turn the Count stopped thecarriage, and requested permission to withdraw, leaving thevehicle at their disposal. Franz looked up -- they wereopposite the Rospoli Palace. At the centre window, the onehung with white damask with a red cross, was a blue domino,beneath which Franz's imagination easily pictured thebeautiful Greek of the Argentina. "Gentlemen," said thecount, springing out, "when you are tired of being actors,and wish to become spectators of this scene, you know youhave places at my windows. In the meantime, dispose of mycoachman, my carriage, and my servants." We have forgottento mention, that the count's coachman was attired in abear-skin, exactly resembling Odry's in "The Bear and thePasha;" and the two footmen behind were dressed up as greenmonkeys, with spring masks, with which they made grimaces atevery one who passed. Franz thanked the count for hisattention. As for Albert, he was busily occupied throwingbouquets at a carriage full of Roman peasants that waspassing near him. Unfortunately for him, the line ofcarriages moved on again, and while he descended the Piazzadel Popolo, the other ascended towards the Palazzo diVenezia. "Ah, my dear fellow," said he to Franz; "you didnot see?"

　　"What?"

　　"There, -- that calash filled with Roman peasants."

　　"No."

　　"Well, I am convinced they are all charming women."

　　"How unfortunate that you were masked, Albert," said Franz;"here was an opportunity of making up for pastdisappointments."

　　"Oh," replied he, half laughing, half serious; "I hope theCarnival will not pass without some amends in one shape orthe other."

　　But, in spite of Albert's hope, the day passed unmarked byany incident, excepting two or three encounters with thecarriage full of Roman peasants. At one of these encounters,accidentally or purposely, Albert's mask fell off. Heinstantly rose and cast the remainder of the bouquets intothe carriage. Doubtless one of the charming females Alberthad detected beneath their coquettish disguise was touchedby his gallantry; for, as the carriage of the two friendspassed her, she threw a bunch of violets. Albert seized it,and as Franz had no reason to suppose it was meant for him,he suffered Albert to retain it. Albert placed it in hisbutton-hole, and the carriage went triumphantly on.

　　"Well," said Franz to him; "there is the beginning of anadventure."

　　"Laugh if you please -- I really think so. So I will notabandon this bouquet."

　　"Pardieu," returned Franz, laughing, "in token of youringratitude." The jest, however, soon appeared to becomeearnest; for when Albert and Franz again encountered thecarriage with the contadini, the one who had thrown theviolets to Albert, clapped her hands when she beheld them inhis button-hole. "Bravo, bravo," said Franz; "things gowonderfully. Shall I leave you? Perhaps you would preferbeing alone?"

　　"No," replied he; "I will not be caught like a fool at afirst disclosure by a rendezvous under the clock, as theysay at the opera-balls. If the fair peasant wishes to carrymatters any further, we shall find her, or rather, she willfind us to-morrow; then she will give me some sign or other,and I shall know what I have to do."

　　"On my word," said Franz, "you are wise as Nestor andprudent as Ulysses, and your fair Circe must be very skilfulor very powerful if she succeed in changing you into a beastof any kind." Albert was right; the fair unknown hadresolved, doubtless, to carry the intrigue no farther; foralthough the young men made several more turns, they did notagain see the calash, which had turned up one of theneighboring streets. Then they returned to the RospoliPalace; but the count and the blue domino had alsodisappeared; the two windows, hung with yellow damask, werestill occupied by the persons whom the count had invited. Atthis moment the same bell that had proclaimed the beginningof the mascherata sounded the retreat. The file on the Corsobroke the line, and in a second all the carriages haddisappeared. Franz and Albert were opposite the Via delleMaratte; the coachman, without saying a word, drove up it,passed along the Piazza di Spagni and the Rospoli Palace andstopped at the door of the hotel. Signor Pastrini came tothe door to receive his guests. Franz hastened to inquireafter the count, and to express regret that he had notreturned in sufficient time; but Pastrini reassured him bysaying that the Count of Monte Cristo had ordered a secondcarriage for himself, and that it had gone at four o'clockto fetch him from the Rospoli Palace. The count had,moreover, charged him to offer the two friends the key ofhis box at the Argentina. Franz questioned Albert as to hisintentions; but Albert had great projects to put intoexecution before going to the theatre; and instead of makingany answer, he inquired if Signor Pastrini could procure hima tailor. "A tailor," said the host; "and for what?"

　　"To make us between now and to-morrow two Roman peasantcostumes," returned Albert. The host shook his head. "Tomake you two costumes between now and to-morrow? I ask yourexcellencies' pardon, but this is quite a French demand; forthe next week you will not find a single tailor who wouldconsent to sew six buttons on a waistcoat if you paid him acrown a piece for each button."

　　"Then I must give up the idea?"

　　"No; we have them ready-made. Leave all to me; andto-morrow, when you awake, you shall find a collection ofcostumes with which you will be satisfied."

　　"My dear Albert," said Franz, "leave all to our host; he hasalready proved himself full of resources; let us dinequietly, and afterwards go and see `The Algerian Captive.'"

　　"Agreed," returned Albert; "but remember, Signor Pastrini,that both my friend and myself attach the greatestimportance to having to-morrow the costumes we have askedfor." The host again assured them they might rely on him,and that their wishes should be attended to; upon whichFranz and Albert mounted to their apartments, and proceededto disencumber themselves of their costumes. Albert, as hetook off his dress, carefully preserved the bunch ofviolets; it was his token reserved for the morrow. The twofriends sat down to table; but they could not refrain fromremarking the difference between the Count of Monte Cristo'stable and that of Signor Pastrini. Truth compelled Franz, inspite of the dislike he seemed to have taken to the count,to confess that the advantage was not on Pastrini's side.During dessert, the servant inquired at what time theywished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at eachother, fearing really to abuse the count's kindness. Theservant understood them. "His excellency the Count of MonteCristo had," he said, "given positive orders that thecarriage was to remain at their lordships' orders all day,and they could therefore dispose of it without fear ofindiscretion."

　　They resolved to profit by the count's courtesy, and orderedthe horses to be harnessed, while they substituted eveningdress for that which they had on, and which was somewhat theworse for the numerous combats they had sustained. Thisprecaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installedthemselves in the count's box. During the first act, theCountess G---- entered. Her first look was at the box whereshe had seen the count the previous evening, so that sheperceived Franz and Albert in the place of the very personconcerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion toFranz. Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them,that Franz saw it would be cruel not to satisfy hercuriosity; and, availing himself of one of the privileges ofthe spectators of the Italian theatres, who use their boxesto hold receptions, the two friends went to pay theirrespects to the countess. Scarcely had they entered, whenshe motioned to Franz to assume the seat of honor. Albert,in his turn, sat behind.

　　"Well," said she, hardly giving Franz time to sit down, "itseems you have nothing better to do than to make theacquaintance of this new Lord Ruthven, and you are alreadythe best friends in the world."

　　"Without being so far advanced as that, my dear countess,"returned Franz, "I cannot deny that we have abused his goodnature all day."

　　"All day?"

　　"Yes; this morning we breakfasted with him; we rode in hiscarriage all day, and now we have taken possession of hisbox."

　　"You know him, then?"

　　"Yes, and no."

　　"How so?"

　　"It is a long story."

　　'Tell it to me."

　　"It would frighten you too much."

　　"So much the more reason."

　　"At least wait until the story has a conclusion."

　　"Very well; I prefer complete histories; but tell me how youmade his acquaintance? Did any one introduce you to him?"

　　"No; it was he who introduced himself to us."

　　"When?"

　　"Last night, after we left you."

　　"Through what medium?"

　　"The very prosaic one of our landlord."

　　"He is staying, then, at the Hotel de Londres with you?"

　　"Not only in the same hotel, but on the same floor."

　　"What is his name -- for, of course, you know?"

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo."

　　"That is not a family name?"

　　"No, it is the name of the island he has purchased."

　　"And he is a count?"

　　"A Tuscan count."

　　"Well, we must put up with that," said the countess, who washerself from one of the oldest Venetian families. "What sortof a man is he?"

　　"Ask the Vicomte de Morcerf."

　　"You hear, M. de Morcerf, I am referred to you," said thecountess.

　　"We should be very hard to please, madam," returned Albert,"did we not think him delightful. A friend of ten years'standing could not have done more for us, or with a moreperfect courtesy."

　　"Come," observed the countess, smiling, "I see my vampire isonly some millionaire, who has taken the appearance of Larain order to avoid being confounded with M. de Rothschild;and you have seen her?"

　　"Her?"

　　"The beautiful Greek of yesterday."

　　"No; we heard, I think, the sound of her guzla, but sheremained perfectly invisible."

　　"When you say invisible," interrupted Albert, "it is only tokeep up the mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino atthe window with the white curtains?"

　　"Where was this window with white hangings?" asked thecountess.

　　"At the Rospoli Palace."

　　"The count had three windows at the Rospoli Palace?"

　　"Yes. Did you pass through the Corso?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, did you notice two windows hung with yellow damask,and one with white damask with a red cross? Those were thecount's windows?"

　　"Why, he must be a nabob. Do you know what those threewindows were worth?"

　　"Two or three hundred Roman crowns?"

　　"Two or three thousand."

　　"The deuce."

　　"Does his island produce him such a revenue?"

　　"It does not bring him a baiocco."

　　"Then why did he purchase it?"

　　"For a whim."

　　"He is an original, then?"

　　"In reality," observed Albert, "he seemed to me somewhateccentric; were he at Paris, and a frequenter of thetheatres, I should say he was a poor devil literally mad.This morning he made two or three exits worthy of Didier orAnthony." At this moment a fresh visitor entered, and,according to custom, Franz gave up his seat to him. Thiscircumstance had, moreover, the effect of changing theconversation; an hour afterwards the two friends returned totheir hotel. Signor Pastrini had already set about procuringtheir disguises for the morrow; and he assured them thatthey would be perfectly satisfied. The next morning, at nineo'clock, he entered Franz's room, followed by a tailor, whohad eight or ten Roman peasant costumes on his arm; theyselected two exactly alike, and charged the tailor to sew oneach of their hats about twenty yards of ribbon, and toprocure them two of the long silk sashes of different colorswith which the lower orders decorate themselves onfete-days. Albert was impatient to see how he looked in hisnew dress -- a jacket and breeches of blue velvet, silkstockings with clocks, shoes with buckles, and a silkwaistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to greatadvantage; and when he had bound the scarf around his waist,and when his hat, placed coquettishly on one side, let fallon his shoulder a stream of ribbons, Franz was forced toconfess that costume has much to do with the physicalsuperiority we accord to certain nations. The Turks used tobe so picturesque with their long and flowing robes, but arethey not now hideous with their blue frocks buttoned up tothe chin, and their red caps, which make them look like abottle of wine with a red seal? Franz complimented Albert,who looked at himself in the glass with an unequivocal smileof satisfaction. They were thus engaged when the Count ofMonte Cristo entered.

　　"Gentlemen," said he, "although a companion is agreeable,perfect freedom is sometimes still more agreeable. I come tosay that to-day, and for the remainder of the Carnival, Ileave the carriage entirely at your disposal. The host willtell you I have three or four more, so that you will notinconvenience me in any way. Make use of it, I pray you, foryour pleasure or your business."

　　The young men wished to decline, but they could find no goodreason for refusing an offer which was so agreeable to them.The Count of Monte Cristo remained a quarter of an hour withthem, conversing on all subjects with the greatest ease. Hewas, as we have already said, perfectly well acquainted withthe literature of all countries. A glance at the walls ofhis salon proved to Franz and Albert that he was aconnoisseur of pictures. A few words he let fall showed themthat he was no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed muchoccupied with chemistry. The two friends did not venture toreturn the count the breakfast he had given them; it wouldhave been too absurd to offer him in exchange for hisexcellent table the very inferior one of Signor Pastrini.They told him so frankly, and he received their excuses withthe air of a man who appreciated their delicacy. Albert wascharmed with the count's manners, and he was only preventedfrom recognizing him for a perfect gentleman by reason ofhis varied knowledge. The permission to do what he likedwith the carriage pleased him above all, for the fairpeasants had appeared in a most elegant carriage thepreceding evening, and Albert was not sorry to be upon anequal footing with them. At half-past one they descended,the coachman and footman had put on their livery over theirdisguises, which gave them a more ridiculous appearance thanever, and which gained them the applause of Franz andAlbert. Albert had fastened the faded bunch of violets tohis button-hole. At the first sound of the bell theyhastened into the Corso by the Via Vittoria. At the secondturn, a bunch of fresh violets, thrown from a carriagefilled with harlequins, indicated to Albert that, likehimself and his friend, the peasants had changed theircostume, also; and whether it was the result of chance, orwhether a similar feeling had possessed them both, while hehad changed his costume they had assumed his.

　　Albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but hekept the faded one in his hand; and when he again met thecalash, he raised it to his lips, an action which seemedgreatly to amuse not only the fair lady who had thrown it,but her joyous companions also. The day was as gay as thepreceding one, perhaps even more animated and noisy; thecount appeared for an instant at his window. but when theyagain passed he had disappeared. It is almost needless tosay that the flirtation between Albert and the fair peasantcontinued all day. In the evening, on his return, Franzfound a letter from the embassy, informing him that he wouldhave the honor of being received by his holiness the nextday. At each previous visit he had made to Rome, he hadsolicited and obtained the same favor; and incited as muchby a religious feeling as by gratitude, he was unwilling toquit the capital of the Christian world without laying hisrespectful homage at the feet of one of St. Peter'ssuccessors who has set the rare example of all the virtues.He did not then think of the Carnival, for in spite of hiscondescension and touching kindness, one cannot inclineone's self without awe before the venerable and noble oldman called Gregory XVI. On his return from the Vatican,Franz carefully avoided the Corso; he brought away with hima treasure of pious thoughts, to which the mad gayety of themaskers would have been profanation. At ten minutes pastfive Albert entered overjoyed. The harlequin had reassumedher peasant's costume, and as she passed she raised hermask. She was charming. Franz congratulated Albert, whoreceived his congratulations with the air of a man consciousthat they are merited. He had recognized by certainunmistakable signs, that his fair incognita belonged to thearistocracy. He had made up his mind to write to her thenext day. Franz remarked, while he gave these details, thatAlbert seemed to have something to ask of him, but that hewas unwilling to ask it. He insisted upon it, declaringbeforehand that he was willing to make any sacrifice theother wished. Albert let himself be pressed just as long asfriendship required, and then avowed to Franz that he woulddo him a great favor by allowing him to occupy the carriagealone the next day. Albert attributed to Franz's absence theextreme kindness of the fair peasant in raising her mask.Franz was not sufficiently egotistical to stop Albert in themiddle of an adventure that promised to prove so agreeableto his curiosity and so flattering to his vanity. He feltassured that the perfect indiscretion of his friend wouldduly inform him of all that happened; and as, during threeyears that he had travelled all over Italy, a similar pieceof good fortune had never fallen to his share, Franz was byno means sorry to learn how to act on such an occasion. Hetherefore promised Albert that he would content himself themorrow with witnessing the Carnival from the windows of theRospoli Palace.

　　The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding anenormous bouquet, which he doubtless meant to make thebearer of his amorous epistle. This belief was changed intocertainty when Franz saw the bouquet (conspicuous by acircle of white camellias) in the hand of a charmingharlequin dressed in rose-colored satin. The evening was nolonger joy, but delirium. Albert nothing doubted but thatthe fair unknown would reply in the same manner. Franzanticipated his wishes by saying that the noise fatiguedhim, and that he should pass the next day in writing andlooking over his journal. Albert was not deceived, for thenext evening Franz saw him enter triumphantly shaking afolded paper which he held by one corner. "Well," said he,"was I mistaken?"

　　"She has answered you!" cried Franz.

　　"Read." This word was pronounced in a manner impossible todescribe. Franz took the letter, and read: --

　　Tuesday evening, at seven o'clock, descend from yourcarriage opposite the Via dei Pontefici, and follow theRoman peasant who snatches your torch from you. When youarrive at the first step of the church of San Giacomo, besure to fasten a knot of rose-colored ribbons to theshoulder of your harlequin costume, in order that you may berecognized. Until then you will not see me.

　　Constancy and Discretion.

　　"Well," asked he, when Franz had finished, "what do youthink of that?"

　　"I think that the adventure is assuming a very agreeableappearance."

　　"I think so, also," replied Albert; "and I very much fearyou will go alone to the Duke of Bracciano's ball." Franzand Albert had received that morning an invitation from thecelebrated Roman banker. "Take care, Albert," said Franz."All the nobility of Rome will be present, and if your fairincognita belong to the higher class of society, she must gothere."

　　"Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still thesame," returned Albert. "You have read the letter?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You know how imperfectly the women of the mezzo cito areeducated in Italy?" (This is the name of the lower class.)

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, read the letter again. Look at the writing, and findif you can, any blemish in the language or orthography."(The writing was, in reality, charming, and the orthographyirreproachable.) "You are born to good fortune," said Franz,as he returned the letter.

　　"Laugh as much as you will," replied Albert, "I am in love."

　　"You alarm me," cried Franz. "I see that I shall not only goalone to the Duke of Bracciano's, but also return toFlorence alone."

　　"If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful," saidAlbert, "I shall fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least.I adore Rome, and I have always had a great taste forarchaeology."

　　"Come, two or three more such adventures, and I do notdespair of seeing you a member of the Academy." DoubtlessAlbert was about to discuss seriously his right to theacademic chair when they were informed that dinner wasready. Albert's love had not taken away his appetite. Hehastened with Franz to seat himself, free to recommence thediscussion after dinner. After dinner, the Count of MonteCristo was announced. They had not seen him for two days.Signor Pastrini informed them that business had called himto Civita Vecchia. He had started the previous evening, andhad only returned an hour since. He was charming. Whether hekept a watch over himself, or whether by accident he did notsound the acrimonious chords that in other circumstances hadbeen touched, he was to-night like everybody else. The manwas an enigma to Franz. The count must feel sure that Franzrecognized him; and yet he had not let fall a single wordindicating any previous acquaintance between them. On hisside, however great Franz's desire was to allude to theirformer interview, the fear of being disagreeable to the manwho had loaded him and his friend with kindness preventedhim from mentioning it. The count had learned that the twofriends had sent to secure a box at the Argentina Theatre,and were told they were all let. In consequence, he broughtthem the key of his own -- at least such was the apparentmotive of his visit. Franz and Albert made some difficulty,alleging their fear of depriving him of it; but the countreplied that, as he was going to the Palli Theatre, the boxat the Argentina Theatre would he lost if they did notprofit by it. This assurance determined the two friends toaccept it.

　　Franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count'spallor, which had so forcibly struck him at their firstmeeting. He could not refrain from admiring the severebeauty of his features, the only defect, or rather theprincipal quality of which was the pallor. Truly, a Byronichero! Franz could not, we will not say see him, but eventhink of him without imagining his stern head upon Manfred'sshoulders, or beneath Lara's helmet. His forehead was markedwith the line that indicates the constant presence of bitterthoughts; he had the fiery eyes that seem to penetrate tothe very soul, and the haughty and disdainful upper lip thatgives to the words it utters a peculiar character thatimpresses them on the minds of those to whom they areaddressed. The count was no longer young. He was at leastforty; and yet it was easy to understand that he was formedto rule the young men with whom he associated at present.And, to complete his resemblance with the fantastic heroesof the English poet, the count seemed to have the power offascination. Albert was constantly expatiating on their goodfortune in meeting such a man. Franz was less enthusiastic;but the count exercised over him also the ascendency astrong mind always acquires over a mind less domineering. Hethought several times of the project the count had ofvisiting Paris; and he had no doubt but that, with hiseccentric character, his characteristic face, and hiscolossal fortune, he would produce a great effect there. Andyet he did not wish to be at Paris when the count was there.The evening passed as evenings mostly pass at Italiantheatres; that is, not in listening to the music, but inpaying visits and conversing. The Countess G---- wished torevive the subject of the count, but Franz announced he hadsomething far newer to tell her, and, in spite of Albert'sdemonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess ofthe great event which had preoccupied them for the lastthree days. As similar intrigues are not uncommon in Italy,if we may credit travellers, the comtess did not manifestthe least incredulity, but congratulated Albert on hissuccess. They promised, upon separating, to meet at the Dukeof Bracciano's ball, to which all Rome was invited. Theheroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave Albert nosign of her existence the morrow or the day after.

　　At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day ofthe Carnival. On Tuesday, the theatres open at ten o'clockin the morning, as Lent begins after eight at night. OnTuesday, all those who through want of money, time, orenthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival before, minglein the gayety, and contribute to the noise and excitement.From two o'clock till five Franz and Albert followed in thefete, exchanging handfuls of confetti with the othercarriages and the pedestrians, who crowded amongst thehorses' feet and the carriage wheels without a singleaccident, a single dispute, or a single fight. The fetes areveritable pleasure days to the Italians. The author of thishistory, who has resided five or six years in Italy, doesnot recollect to have ever seen a ceremony interrupted byone of those events so common in other countries. Albert wastriumphant in his harlequin costume. A knot of rose-coloredribbons fell from his shoulder almost to the ground. Inorder that there might be no confusion, Franz wore hispeasant's costume.

　　As the day advanced, the tumult became greater. There wasnot on the pavement, in the carriages, at the windows, asingle tongue that was silent, a single arm that did notmove. It was a human storm, made up of a thunder of cries,and a hail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs, oranges, andnosegays. At three o'clock the sound of fireworks, let offon the Piazza del Popolo and the Piazza di Venezia (heardwith difficulty amid the din and confusion) announced thatthe races were about to begin. The races, like the moccoli,are one of the episodes peculiar to the last days of theCarnival. At the sound of the fireworks the carriagesinstantly broke ranks, and retired by the adjacent streets.All these evolutions are executed with an inconceivableaddress and marvellous rapidity, without the policeinterfering in the matter. The pedestrians ranged themselvesagainst the walls; then the trampling of horses and theclashing of steel were heard. A detachment of carbineers,fifteen abreast, galloped up the Corso in order to clear itfor the barberi. When the detachment arrived at the Piazzadi Venezia, a second volley of fireworks was discharged, toannounce that the street was clear. Almost instantly, in themidst of a tremendous and general outcry, seven or eighthorses, excited by the shouts of three hundred thousandspectators, passed by like lightning. Then the Castle ofSaint Angelo fired three cannon to indicate that numberthree had won. Immediately, without any other signal, thecarriages moved on, flowing on towards the Corso, down allthe streets, like torrents pent up for a while, which againflow into the parent river; and the immense stream againcontinued its course between its two granite banks.

　　A new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd.The sellers of moccoletti entered on the scene. The moccoli,or moccoletti, are candles which vary in size from thepascal taper to the rushlight, and which give to each actorin the great final scene of the Carnival two very seriousproblems to grapple with, -- first, how to keep his ownmoccoletto alight; and secondly, how to extinguish themoccoletti of others. The moccoletto is like life: man hasfound but one means of transmitting it, and that one comesfrom God. But he has discovered a thousand means of takingit away, and the devil has somewhat aided him. Themoccoletto is kindled by approaching it to a light. But whocan describe the thousand means of extinguishing themoccoletto? -- the gigantic bellows, the monstrousextinguishers, the superhuman fans. Every one hastened topurchase moccoletti -- Franz and Albert among the rest.

　　The night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cryof "Moccoletti!" repeated by the shrill voices of a thousandvendors, two or three stars began to burn among the crowd.It was a signal. At the end of ten minutes fifty thousandlights glittered, descending from the Palazzo di Venezia tothe Piazza del Popolo, and mounting from the Piazzo delPopolo to the Palazzo di Venezia. It seemed like the fete ofjack-o'-lanterns. It is impossible to form any idea of itwithout having seen it. Suppose that all the stars haddescended from the sky and mingled in a wild dance on theface of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that werenever heard in any other part of the world. The facchinofollows the prince, the Transteverin the citizen, every oneblowing, extinguishing, relighting. Had old AEolus appearedat this moment, he would have been proclaimed king of themoccoli, and Aquilo the heir-presumptive to the throne. Thisbattle of folly and flame continued for two hours; the Corsowas light as day; the features of the spectators on thethird and fourth stories were visible. Every five minutesAlbert took out his watch; at length it pointed to seven.The two friends were in the Via dei Pontefici. Albert sprangout, bearing his moccoletto in his hand. Two or three masksstrove to knock his moccoletto out of his hand; but Albert,a first-rate pugilist, sent them rolling in the street, oneafter the other, and continued his course towards the churchof San Giacomo. The steps were crowded with masks, whostrove to snatch each other's torches. Franz followed Albertwith his eyes, and saw him mount the first step. Instantly amask, wearing the well-known costume of a peasant woman,snatched his moccoletto from him without his offering anyresistance. Franz was too far off to hear what they said;but, without doubt, nothing hostile passed, for he sawAlbert disappear arm-in-arm with the peasant girl. Hewatched them pass through the crowd for some time, but atlength he lost sight of them in the Via Macello. Suddenlythe bell that gives the signal for the end of the carnivalsounded, and at the same instant all the moccoletti wereextinguished as if by enchantment. It seemed as though oneimmense blast of the wind had extinguished every one. Franzfound himself in utter darkness. No sound was audible savethat of the carriages that were carrying the maskers home;nothing was visible save a few lights that burnt behind thewindows. The Carnival was over.

　　Chapter 37The Catacombs of Saint Sebastian.

　　In his whole life, perhaps, Franz had never beforeexperienced so sudden an impression, so rapid a transitionfrom gayety to sadness, as in this moment. It seemed asthough Rome, under the magic breath of some demon of thenight, had suddenly changed into a vast tomb. By a chance,which added yet more to the intensity of the darkness, themoon, which was on the wane, did not rise until eleveno'clock, and the streets which the young man traversed wereplunged in the deepest obscurity. The distance was short,and at the end of ten minutes his carriage, or rather thecount's, stopped before the Hotel de Londres. Dinner waswaiting, but as Albert had told him that he should notreturn so soon, Franz sat down without him. Signor Pastrini,who had been accustomed to see them dine together, inquiredinto the cause of his absence, but Franz merely replied thatAlbert had received on the previous evening an invitationwhich he had accepted. The sudden extinction of themoccoletti, the darkness which had replaced the light, andthe silence which had succeeded the turmoil, had left inFranz's mind a certain depression which was not free fromuneasiness. He therefore dined very silently, in spite ofthe officious attention of his host, who presented himselftwo or three times to inquire if he wanted anything.

　　Franz resolved to wait for Albert as late as possible. Heordered the carriage, therefore, for eleven o'clock,desiring Signor Pastrini to inform him the moment thatAlbert returned to the hotel. At eleven o'clock Albert hadnot come back. Franz dressed himself, and went out, tellinghis host that he was going to pass the night at the Duke ofBracciano's. The house of the Duke of Bracciano is one ofthe most delightful in Rome, the duchess, one of the lastheiresses of the Colonnas, does its honors with the mostconsummate grace, and thus their fetes have a Europeancelebrity. Franz and Albert had brought to Rome letters ofintroduction to them, and their first question on hisarrival was to inquire the whereabouts of his travellingcompanion. Franz replied that he had left him at the momentthey were about to extinguish the moccoli, and that he hadlost sight of him in the Via Macello. "Then he has notreturned?" said the duke.

　　"I waited for him until this hour," replied Franz.

　　"And do you know whither he went?"

　　"No, not precisely; however, I think it was something verylike a rendezvous."

　　"Diavolo!" said the duke, "this is a bad day, or rather abad night, to be out late; is it not, countess!" These wordswere addressed to the Countess G---- , who had justarrived, and was leaning on the arm of Signor Torlonia, theduke's brother.

　　"I think, on the contrary, that it is a charming night,"replied the countess, "and those who are here will complainof but one thing -- its too rapid flight."

　　"I am not speaking," said the duke with a smile, "of thepersons who are here; the men run no other danger than thatof falling in love with you, and the women of falling ill ofjealousy at seeing you so lovely; I meant persons who wereout in the streets of Rome."

　　"Ah," asked the countess, "who is out in the streets of Romeat this hour, unless it be to go to a ball?"

　　"Our friend, Albert de Morcerf, countess, whom I left inpursuit of his unknown about seven o'clock this evening,"said Franz, "and whom I have not seen since."

　　"And don't you know where he is?"

　　"Not at all."

　　"Is he armed?"

　　"He is in masquerade."

　　"You should not have allowed him to go," said the duke toFranz; "you, who know Rome better than he does."

　　"You might as well have tried to stop number three of thebarberi, who gained the prize in the race to-day," repliedFranz; "and then moreover, what could happen to him?"

　　"Who can tell? The night is gloomy, and the Tiber is verynear the Via Macello." Franz felt a shudder run through hisveins at observing that the feeling of the duke and thecountess was so much in unison with his own personaldisquietude. "I informed them at the hotel that I had thehonor of passing the night here, duke," said Franz, "anddesired them to come and inform me of his return."

　　"Ah," replied the duke, "here I think, is one of my servantswho is seeking you."

　　The duke was not mistaken; when he saw Franz, the servantcame up to him. "Your excellency," he said, "the master ofthe Hotel de Londres has sent to let you know that a man iswaiting for you with a letter from the Viscount of Morcerf."

　　"A letter from the viscount!" exclaimed Franz.

　　"Yes."

　　"And who is the man?"

　　"I do not know."

　　"Why did he not bring it to me here?"

　　"The messenger did not say."

　　"And where is the messenger?"

　　"He went away directly he saw me enter the ball-room to findyou."

　　"Oh," said the countess to Franz, "go with all speed -- pooryoung man! Perhaps some accident has happened to him."

　　"I will hasten," replied Franz.

　　"Shall we see you again to give us any information?"inquired the countess.

　　"Yes, if it is not any serious affair, otherwise I cannotanswer as to what I may do myself."

　　"Be prudent, in any event," said the countess.

　　"Oh, pray be assured of that." Franz took his hat and wentaway in haste. He had sent away his carriage with orders forit to fetch him at two o'clock; fortunately the PalazzoBracciano, which is on one side in the Corso, and on theother in the Square of the Holy Apostles, is hardly tenminutes' walk from the Hotel de Londres. As he came near thehotel, Franz saw a man in the middle of the street. He hadno doubt that it was the messenger from Albert. The man waswrapped up in a large cloak. He went up to him, but, to hisextreme astonishment, the stranger first addressed him."What wants your excellency of me?" inquired the man,retreating a step or two, as if to keep on his guard.

　　"Are not you the person who brought me a letter," inquiredFranz, "from the Viscount of Morcerf?"

　　"Your excellency lodges at Pastrini's hotel?"

　　"I do."

　　"Your excellency is the travelling companion of theviscount?"

　　"I am."

　　"Your excellency's name" --

　　"Is the Baron Franz d'Epinay."

　　"Then it is to your excellency that this letter isaddressed."

　　"Is there any answer?" inquired Franz, taking the letterfrom him.

　　"Yes -- your friend at least hopes so."

　　"Come up-stairs with me, and I will give it to you."

　　"I prefer waiting here," said the messenger, with a smile.

　　"And why?"

　　"Your excellency will know when you have read the letter."

　　"Shall I find you here, then?"

　　"Certainly."

　　Franz entered the hotel. On the staircase he met SignorPastrini. "Well?" said the landlord.

　　"Well -- what?" responded Franz.

　　"You have seen the man who desired to speak with you fromyour friend?" he asked of Franz.

　　"Yes, I have seen him," he replied, "and he has handed thisletter to me. Light the candles in my apartment, if youplease." The inn-keeper gave orders to a servant to gobefore Franz with a light. The young man had found SignorPastrini looking very much alarmed, and this had only madehim the more anxious to read Albert's letter; and so he wentinstantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. It waswritten and signed by Albert. Franz read it twice before hecould comprehend what it contained. It was thus worded: --

　　My Dear Fellow, -- The moment you have received this, havethe kindness to take the letter of credit from mypocket-book, which you will find in the square drawer of thesecretary; add your own to it, if it be not sufficient. Runto Torlonia, draw from him instantly four thousand piastres,and give them to the bearer. It is urgent that I should havethis money without delay. I do not say more, relying on youas you may rely on me. Your friend,

　　Albert de Morcerf.

　　P.S. -- I now believe in Italian banditti.

　　Below these lines were written, in a strange hand, thefollowing in Italian: --

　　Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mile piastre non sononelle mie mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avra cessato divivere.

　　Luigi Vampa.

　　"If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are notin my hands, by seven o'clock the Count Albert will haveceased to live."

　　This second signature explained everything to Franz, who nowunderstood the objection of the messenger to coming up intothe apartment; the street was safer for him. Albert, then,had fallen into the hands of the famous bandit chief, inwhose existence he had for so long a time refused tobelieve. There was no time to lose. He hastened to open thesecretary, and found the pocket-book in the drawer, and init the letter of credit. There were in all six thousandpiastres, but of these six thousand Albert had alreadyexpended three thousand. As to Franz, he had no letter ofcredit, as he lived at Florence, and had only come to Rometo pass seven or eight days; he had brought but a hundredlouis, and of these he had not more than fifty left. Thusseven or eight hundred piastres were wanting to them both tomake up the sum that Albert required. True, he might in sucha case rely on the kindness of Signor Torlonia. He was,therefore, about to return to the Palazzo Bracciano withoutloss of time, when suddenly a luminous idea crossed hismind. He remembered the Count of Monte Cristo. Franz wasabout to ring for Signor Pastrini, when that worthypresented himself. "My dear sir," he said, hastily, "do youknow if the count is within?"

　　"Yes, your excellency; he has this moment returned."

　　"Is he in bed?"

　　"I should say no."

　　"Then ring at his door, if you please, and request him to beso kind as to give me an audience." Signor Pastrini did ashe was desired, and returning five minutes after, he said,-- "The count awaits your excellency." Franz went along thecorridor, and a servant introduced him to the count. He wasin a small room which Franz had not yet seen, and which wassurrounded with divans. The count came towards him. "Well,what good wind blows you hither at this hour?" said he;"have you come to sup with me? It would be very kind ofyou."

　　"No; I have come to speak to you of a very serious matter."

　　"A serious matter," said the count, looking at Franz withthe earnestness usual to him; "and what may it be?"

　　"Are we alone?"

　　"Yes," replied the count, going to the door, and returning.Franz gave him Albert's letter. "Read that," he said. Thecount read it.

　　"Well, well!" said he.

　　"Did you see the postscript?"

　　"I did, indeed.

　　"`Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mile piastre non sononelle mie mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avra cessato divivere.

　　"`Luigi Vampa.'"

　　"What think you of that?" inquired Franz.

　　"Have you the money he demands?"

　　"Yes, all but eight hundred piastres." The count went to hissecretary, opened it, and pulling out a drawer filled withgold, said to Franz, -- "I hope you will not offend me byapplying to any one but myself."

　　"You see, on the contrary, I come to you first andinstantly," replied Franz.

　　"And I thank you; have what you will; "and he made a sign toFranz to take what he pleased.

　　"Is it absolutely necessary, then, to send the money toLuigi Vampa?" asked the young man, looking fixedly in histurn at the count.

　　"Judge for yourself," replied he. "The postscript isexplicit."

　　"I think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting,you could find a way of simplifying the negotiation," saidFranz.

　　"How so?" returned the count, with surprise.

　　"If we were to go together to Luigi Vampa, I am sure hewould not refuse you Albert's freedom."

　　"What influence can I possibly have over a bandit?"

　　"Have you not just rendered him a service that can never beforgotten?"

　　"What is that?"

　　"Have you not saved Peppino's life?"

　　"Well, well, said the count, "who told you that?"

　　"No matter; I know it." The count knit his brows, andremained silent an instant. "And if I went to seek Vampa,would you accompany me?"

　　"If my society would not be disagreeable."

　　"Be it so. It is a lovely night, and a walk without Romewill do us both good."

　　"Shall I take any arms?"

　　"For what purpose?"

　　"Any money?"

　　"It is useless. Where is the man who brought the letter?"

　　"In the street."

　　"He awaits the answer?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I must learn where we are going. I will summon him hither."

　　"It is useless; he would not come up."

　　"To your apartments, perhaps; but he will not make anydifficulty at entering mine." The count went to the windowof the apartment that looked on to the street, and whistledin a peculiar manner. The man in the mantle quitted thewall, and advanced into the middle of the street. "Salite!"said the count, in the same tone in which he would havegiven an order to his servant. The messenger obeyed withoutthe least hesitation, but rather with alacrity, and,mounting the steps at a bound, entered the hotel; fiveseconds afterwards he was at the door of the room. "Ah, itis you, Peppino," said the count. But Peppino, instead ofanswering, threw himself on his knees, seized the count'shand, and covered it with kisses. "Ah," said the count, "youhave, then, not forgotten that I saved your life; that isstrange, for it is a week ago."

　　"No, excellency; and never shall I forget it," returnedPeppino, with an accent of profound gratitude.

　　"Never? That is a long time; but it is something that youbelieve so. Rise and answer." Peppino glanced anxiously atFranz. "Oh, you may speak before his excellency," said he;"he is one of my friends. You allow me to give you thistitle?" continued the count in French, "it is necessary toexcite this man's confidence."

　　"You can speak before me," said Franz; "I am a friend of thecount's."

　　"Good!" returned Peppino. "I am ready to answer anyquestions your excellency may address to me."

　　"How did the Viscount Albert fall into Luigi's hands?"

　　"Excellency, the Frenchman's carriage passed several timesthe one in which was Teresa."

　　"The chief's mistress?"

　　"Yes. The Frenchman threw her a bouquet; Teresa returned it-- all this with the consent of the chief, who was in thecarriage."

　　"What?" cried Franz, "was Luigi Vampa in the carriage withthe Roman peasants?"

　　"It was he who drove, disguised as the coachman," repliedPeppino.

　　"Well?" said the count.

　　"Well, then, the Frenchman took off his mask; Teresa, withthe chief's consent, did the same. The Frenchman asked for arendezvous; Teresa gave him one -- only, instead of Teresa,it was Beppo who was on the steps of the church of SanGiacomo."

　　"What!" exclaimed Franz, "the peasant girl who snatched hismocoletto from him" --

　　"Was a lad of fifteen," replied Peppino. "But it was nodisgrace to your friend to have been deceived; Beppo hastaken in plenty of others."

　　"And Beppo led him outside the walls?" said the count.

　　"Exactly so; a carriage was waiting at the end of the ViaMacello. Beppo got in, inviting the Frenchman to follow him,and he did not wait to be asked twice. He gallantly offeredthe right-hand seat to Beppo, and sat by him. Beppo told himhe was going to take him to a villa a league from Rome; theFrenchman assured him he would follow him to the end of theworld. The coachman went up the Via di Ripetta and the PortaSan Paola; and when they were two hundred yards outside, asthe Frenchman became somewhat too forward, Beppo put a braceof pistols to his head, the coachman pulled up and did thesame. At the same time, four of the band, who were concealedon the banks of the Almo, surrounded the carriage. TheFrenchman made some resistance, and nearly strangled Beppo;but he could not resist five armed men. and was forced toyield. They made him get out, walk along the banks of theriver, and then brought him to Teresa and Luigi, who werewaiting for him in the catacombs of St. Sebastian."

　　"Well," said the count, turning towards Franz, "it seems tome that this is a very likely story. What do you say to it?"

　　"Why, that I should think it very amusing," replied Franz,"if it had happened to any one but poor Albert."

　　"And, in truth, if you had not found me here," said thecount, "it might have proved a gallant adventure which wouldhave cost your friend dear; but now, be assured, his alarmwill be the only serious consequence."

　　"And shall we go and find him?" inquired Franz.

　　"Oh, decidedly, sir. He is in a very picturesque place -- doyou know the catacombs of St. Sebastian?"

　　"I was never in them; but I have often resolved to visitthem."

　　"Well, here is an opportunity made to your hand, and itwould be difficult to contrive a better. Have you acarriage?"

　　"No."

　　"That is of no consequence; I always have one ready, day andnight."

　　"Always ready?"

　　"Yes. I am a very capricious being, and I should tell youthat sometimes when I rise, or after my dinner, or in themiddle of the night, I resolve on starting for someparticular point, and away I go." The count rang, and afootman appeared. "Order out the carriage," he said, "andremove the pistols which are in the holsters. You need notawaken the coachman; Ali will drive." In a very short timethe noise of wheels was heard, and the carriage stopped atthe door. The count took out his watch. "Half-past twelve,"he said. "We might start at five o'clock and be in time, butthe delay may cause your friend to pass an uneasy night, andtherefore we had better go with all speed to extricate himfrom the hands of the infidels. Are you still resolved toaccompany me?"

　　"More determined than ever."

　　"Well, then, come along."

　　Franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by Peppino.At the door they found the carriage. Ali was on the box, inwhom Franz recognized the dumb slave of the grotto of MonteCristo. Franz and the count got into the carriage. Peppinoplaced himself beside Ali, and they set off at a rapid pace.Ali had received his instructions, and went down the Corso,crossed the Campo Vaccino, went up the Strada San Gregorio,and reached the gates of St. Sebastian. Then the porterraised some difficulties, but the Count of Monte Cristoproduced a permit from the governor of Rome, allowing him toleave or enter the city at any hour of the day or night; theportcullis was therefore raised, the porter had a louis forhis trouble, and they went on their way. The road which thecarriage now traversed was the ancient Appian Way, andbordered with tombs. From time to time, by the light of themoon, which began to rise, Franz imagined that he sawsomething like a sentinel appear at various points among theruins, and suddenly retreat into the darkness on a signalfrom Peppino. A short time before they reached the Baths ofCaracalla the carriage stopped, Peppino opened the door, andthe count and Franz alighted.

　　"In ten minutes," said the count to his companion, "we shallbe there."

　　He then took Peppino aside, gave him an order in a lowvoice, and Peppino went away, taking with him a torch,brought with them in the carriage. Five minutes elapsed,during which Franz saw the shepherd going along a narrowpath that led over the irregular and broken surface of theCampagna; and finally he disappeared in the midst of thetall red herbage, which seemed like the bristling mane of anenormous lion. "Now," said the count, "let us follow him."Franz and the count in their turn then advanced along thesame path, which, at the distance of a hundred paces, ledthem over a declivity to the bottom of a small valley. Theythen perceived two men conversing in the obscurity. "Oughtwe to go on?" asked Franz of the count; "or shall we waitawhile?"

　　"Let us go on; Peppino will have warned the sentry of ourcoming." One of the two men was Peppino, and the other abandit on the lookout. Franz and the count advanced, and thebandit saluted them. "Your excellency," said Peppino,addressing the count, "if you will follow me, the opening ofthe catacombs is close at hand."

　　"Go on, then," replied the count. They came to an openingbehind a clump of bushes and in the midst of a pile ofrocks, by which a man could scarcely pass. Peppino glidedfirst into this crevice; after they got along a few pacesthe passage widened. Peppino passed, lighted his torch, andturned to see if they came after him. The count firstreached an open space and Franz followed him closely. Thepassageway sloped in a gentle descent, enlarging as theyproceeded; still Franz and the count were compelled toadvance in a stooping posture, and were scarcely able toproceed abreast of one another. They went on a hundred andfifty paces in this way, and then were stopped by, "Whocomes there?" At the same time they saw the reflection of atorch on a carbine barrel.

　　"A friend!" responded Peppino; and, advancing alone towardsthe sentry, he said a few words to him in a low tone; andthen he, like the first, saluted the nocturnal visitors,making a sign that they might proceed.

　　Behind the sentinel was a staircase with twenty steps. Franzand the count descended these, and found themselves in amortuary chamber. Five corridors diverged like the rays of astar, and the walls, dug into niches, which were arrangedone above the other in the shape of coffins, showed thatthey were at last in the catacombs. Down one of thecorridors, whose extent it was impossible to determine, raysof light were visible. The count laid his hand on Franz'sshoulder. "Would you like to see a camp of bandits inrepose?" he inquired.

　　"Exceedingly," replied Franz.

　　"Come with me, then. Peppino, put out the torch." Peppinoobeyed, and Franz and the count were in utter darkness,except that fifty paces in advance of them a reddish glare,more evident since Peppino had put out his torch, wasvisible along the wall. They advanced silently, the countguiding Franz as if he had the singular faculty of seeing inthe dark. Franz himself, however, saw his way more plainlyin proportion as he went on towards the light, which servedin some manner as a guide. Three arcades were before them,and the middle one was used as a door. These arcades openedon one side into the corridor where the count and Franzwere, and on the other into a large square chamber, entirelysurrounded by niches similar to those of which we havespoken. In the midst of this chamber were four stones, whichhad formerly served as an altar, as was evident from thecross which still surmounted them. A lamp, placed at thebase of a pillar, lighted up with its pale and flickeringflame the singular scene which presented itself to the eyesof the two visitors concealed in the shadow. A man wasseated with his elbow leaning on the column, and was readingwith his back turned to the arcades, through the openings ofwhich the newcomers contemplated him. This was the chief ofthe band, Luigi Vampa. Around him, and in groups, accordingto their fancy, lying in their mantles, or with their backsagainst a sort of stone bench, which went all round thecolumbarium, were to be seen twenty brigands or more, eachhaving his carbine within reach. At the other end, silent,scarcely visible, and like a shadow, was a sentinel, who waswalking up and down before a grotto, which was onlydistinguishable because in that spot the darkness seemedmore dense than elsewhere. When the count thought Franz hadgazed sufficiently on this picturesque tableau, he raisedhis finger to his lips, to warn him to be silent, and,ascending the three steps which led to the corridor of thecolumbarium, entered the chamber by the middle arcade, andadvanced towards Vampa, who was so intent on the book beforehim that he did not hear the noise of his footsteps.

　　"Who comes there?" cried the sentinel, who was lessabstracted, and who saw by the lamp-light a shadowapproaching his chief. At this challenge, Vampa rosequickly, drawing at the same moment a pistol from hisgirdle. In a moment all the bandits were on their feet, andtwenty carbines were levelled at the count. "Well," said hein a voice perfectly calm, and no muscle of his countenancedisturbed, "well, my dear Vampa, it appears to me that youreceive a friend with a great deal of ceremony."

　　"Ground arms," exclaimed the chief, with an imperative signof the hand, while with the other he took off his hatrespectfully; then, turning to the singular personage whohad caused this scene, he said, "Your pardon, yourexcellency, but I was so far from expecting the honor of avisit, that I did not really recognize you."

　　"It seems that your memory is equally short in everything,Vampa," said the count, "and that not only do you forgetpeople's faces, but also the conditions you make with them."

　　"What conditions have I forgotten, your excellency?"inquired the bandit, with the air of a man who, havingcommitted an error, is anxious to repair it.

　　"Was it not agreed," asked the count, "that not only myperson, but also that of my friends, should be respected byyou?"

　　"And how have I broken that treaty, your excellency?"

　　"You have this evening carried off and conveyed hither theVicomte Albert de Morcerf. Well," continued the count, in atone that made Franz shudder, "this young gentleman is oneof my friends -- this young gentleman lodges in the samehotel as myself -- this young gentleman has been up and downthe Corso for eight hours in my private carriage, and yet, Irepeat to you, you have carried him off, and conveyed himhither, and," added the count, taking the letter from hispocket, "you have set a ransom on him, as if he were anutter stranger."

　　"Why did you not tell me all this -- you?" inquired thebrigand chief, turning towards his men, who all retreatedbefore his look. "Why have you caused me thus to fail in myword towards a gentleman like the count, who has all ourlives in his hands? By heavens, if I thought one of you knewthat the young gentleman was the friend of his excellency, Iwould blow his brains out with my own hand!"

　　"Well," said the count, turning towards Franz, "I told youthere was some mistake in this."

　　"Are you not alone?" asked Vampa with uneasiness.

　　"I am with the person to whom this letter was addressed, andto whom I desired to prove that Luigi Vampa was a man of hisword. Come, your excellency," the count added, turning toFranz, "here is Luigi Vampa, who will himself express to youhis deep regret at the mistake he has committed." Franzapproached, the chief advancing several steps to meet him."Welcome among us, your excellency," he said to him; "youheard what the count just said, and also my reply; let meadd that I would not for the four thousand piastres at whichI had fixed your friend's ransom, that this had happened."

　　"But," said Franz, looking round him uneasily, "where is theViscount? -- I do not see him."

　　"Nothing has happened to him, I hope," said the countfrowningly.

　　"The prisoner is there," replied Vampa, pointing to thehollow space in front of which the bandit was on guard, "andI will go myself and tell him he is free." The chief wenttowards the place he had pointed out as Albert's prison, andFranz and the count followed him. "What is the prisonerdoing?" inquired Vampa of the sentinel.

　　"Ma foi, captain," replied the sentry, "I do not know; forthe last hour I have not heard him stir."

　　"Come in, your excellency," said Vampa. The count and Franzascended seven or eight steps after the chief, who drew backa bolt and opened a door. Then, by the gleam of a lamp,similar to that which lighted the columbarium, Albert was tobe seen wrapped up in a cloak which one of the bandits hadlent him, lying in a corner in profound slumber. "Come,"said the count, smiling with his own peculiar smile, "not sobad for a man who is to be shot at seven o'clock to-morrowmorning." Vampa looked at Albert with a kind of admiration;he was not insensible to such a proof of courage.

　　"You are right, your excellency," he said; "this must be oneof your friends." Then going to Albert, he touched him onthe shoulder, saying, "Will your excellency please toawaken?" Albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids,and opened his eyes. "Oh," said he, "is it you, captain? Youshould have allowed me to sleep. I had such a delightfuldream. I was dancing the galop at Torlonia's with theCountess G---- ." Then he drew his watch from his pocket,that he might see how time sped.

　　"Half-past one only?" said he. "Why the devil do you rouseme at this hour?"

　　"To tell you that you are free, your excellency."

　　"My dear fellow," replied Albert, with perfect ease of mind,"remember, for the future, Napoleon's maxim, `Never awakenme but for bad news;' if you had let me sleep on, I shouldhave finished my galop, and have been grateful to you all mylife. So, then, they have paid my ransom?"

　　"No, your excellency."

　　"Well, then, how am I free?"

　　"A person to whom I can refuse nothing has come to demandyou."

　　"Come hither?"

　　"Yes, hither."

　　"Really? Then that person is a most amiable person." Albertlooked around and perceived Franz. "What," said he, "is ityou, my dear Franz, whose devotion and friendship are thusdisplayed?"

　　"No, not I," replied Franz, "but our neighbor, the Count ofMonte Cristo."

　　"Oh. my dear count." said Albert gayly, arranging his cravatand wristbands, "you are really most kind, and I hope youwill consider me as under eternal obligations to you, in thefirst place for the carriage, and in the next for thisvisit," and he put out his hand to the Count, who shudderedas he gave his own, but who nevertheless did give it. Thebandit gazed on this scene with amazement; he was evidentlyaccustomed to see his prisoners tremble before him, and yethere was one whose gay temperament was not for a momentaltered; as for Franz, he was enchanted at the way in whichAlbert had sustained the national honor in the presence ofthe bandit. "My dear Albert," he said, "if you will makehaste, we shall yet have time to finish the night atTorlonia's. You may conclude your interrupted galop, so thatyou will owe no ill-will to Signor Luigi, who has, indeed,throughout this whole affair acted like a gentleman."

　　"You are decidedly right, and we may reach the Palazzo bytwo o'clock. Signor Luigi," continued Albert, "is there anyformality to fulfil before I take leave of your excellency?"

　　"None, sir," replied the bandit, "you are as free as air."

　　"Well, then, a happy and merry life to you. Come, gentlemen,come."

　　And Albert, followed by Franz and the count, descended thestaircase, crossed the square chamber, where stood all thebandits, hat in hand. "Peppino," said the brigand chief,"give me the torch."

　　"What are you going to do?" inquired the count.

　　"l will show you the way back myself," said the captain;"that is the least honor that I can render to yourexcellency." And taking the lighted torch from the hands ofthe herdsman, he preceded his guests, not as a servant whoperforms an act of civility, but like a king who precedesambassadors. On reaching the door, he bowed. "And now, yourexcellency," added he, "allow me to repeat my apologies, andI hope you will not entertain any resentment at what hasoccurred."

　　"No, my dear Vampa," replied the count; "besides, youcompensate for your mistakes in so gentlemanly a way, thatone almost feels obliged to you for having committed them."

　　"Gentlemen," added the chief, turning towards the young men,"perhaps the offer may not appear very tempting to you; butif you should ever feel inclined to pay me a second visit,wherever I may be, you shall be welcome." Franz and Albertbowed. The count went out first, then Albert. Franz pausedfor a moment. "Has your excellency anything to ask me?" saidVampa with a smile.

　　"Yes, I have," replied Franz; "I am curious to know whatwork you were perusing with so much attention as weentered."

　　"Caesar's `Commentaries,'" said the bandit, "it is myfavorite work."

　　"Well, are you coming?" asked Albert.

　　"Yes," replied Franz, "here I am," and he, in his turn, leftthe caves. They advanced to the plain. "Ah, your pardon,"said Albert, turning round; "will you allow me, captain?"And he lighted his cigar at Vampa's torch. "Now, my dearcount," he said, "let us on with all the speed we may. I amenormously anxious to finish my night at the Duke ofBracciano's." They found the carriage where they had leftit. The count said a word in Arabic to Ali, and the horseswent on at great speed. It was just two o'clock by Albert'swatch when the two friends entered into the dancing-room.Their return was quite an event, but as they enteredtogether, all uneasiness on Albert's account ceasedinstantly. "Madame," said the Viscount of Morcerf, advancingtowards the countess, "yesterday you were so condescendingas to promise me a galop; I am rather late in claiming thisgracious promise, but here is my friend, whose character forveracity you well know, and he will assure you the delayarose from no fault of mine." And as at this moment theorchestra gave the signal for the waltz, Albert put his armround the waist of the countess, and disappeared with her inthe whirl of dancers. In the meanwhile Franz was consideringthe singular shudder that had passed over the Count of MonteCristo at the moment when he had been, in some sort, forcedto give his hand to Albert.

　　Chapter 38The Compact.

　　The first words that Albert uttered to his friend, on thefollowing morning, contained a request that Franz wouldaccompany him on a visit to the count; true, the young manhad warmly and energetically thanked the count on theprevious evening; but services such as he had rendered couldnever be too often acknowledged. Franz, who seemed attractedby some invisible influence towards the count, in whichterror was strangely mingled, felt an extreme reluctance topermit his friend to be exposed alone to the singularfascination that this mysterious personage seemed toexercise over him, and therefore made no objection toAlbert's request, but at once accompanied him to the desiredspot, and, after a short delay, the count joined them in thesalon. "My dear count," said Albert, advancing to meet him,"permit me to repeat the poor thanks I offered last night,and to assure you that the remembrance of all I owe to youwill never be effaced from my memory; believe me, as long asI live, I shall never cease to dwell with gratefulrecollection on the prompt and important service yourendered me; and also to remember that to you I am indebtedeven for my life."

　　"My very good friend and excellent neighbor," replied thecount, with a smile, "you really exaggerate my triflingexertions. You owe me nothing but some trifle of 20,000francs, which you have been saved out of your travellingexpenses, so that there is not much of a score between us;-- but you must really permit me to congratulate you on theease and unconcern with which you resigned yourself to yourfate, and the perfect indifference you manifested as to theturn events might take."

　　"Upon my word," said Albert, "I deserve no credit for what Icould not help, namely, a determination to take everythingas I found it, and to let those bandits see, that althoughmen get into troublesome scrapes all over the world, thereis no nation but the French that can smile even in the faceof grim Death himself. All that, however, has nothing to dowith my obligations to you, and I now come to ask youwhether, in my own person, my family, or connections, I canin any way serve you? My father, the Comte de Morcerf,although of Spanish origin, possesses considerableinfluence, both at the court of France and Madrid, and Iunhesitatingly place the best services of myself, and all towhom my life is dear, at your disposal."

　　"Monsieur de Morcerf," replied the count, "your offer, farfrom surprising me, is precisely what I expected from you,and I accept it in the same spirit of hearty sincerity withwhich it is made; -- nay, I will go still further, and saythat I had previously made up my mind to ask a great favorat your hands."

　　"Oh, pray name it."

　　"I am wholly a stranger to Paris -- it is a city I havenever yet seen."

　　"Is it possible," exclaimed Albert, "that you have reachedyour present age without visiting the finest capital in theworld? I can scarcely credit it."

　　"Nevertheless, it is quite true; still, I agree with you inthinking that my present ignorance of the first city inEurope is a reproach to me in every way, and calls forimmediate correction; but, in all probability, I should haveperformed so important, so necessary a duty, as that ofmaking myself acquainted with the wonders and beauties ofyour justly celebrated capital, had I known any person whowould have introduced me into the fashionable world, butunfortunately I possessed no acquaintance there, and, ofnecessity, was compelled to abandon the idea."

　　"So distinguished an individual as yourself," cried Albert,"could scarcely have required an introduction."

　　"You are most kind; but as regards myself, I can find nomerit I possess, save that, as a millionaire, I might havebecome a partner in the speculations of M. Aguado and M.Rothschild; but as my motive in travelling to your capitalwould not have been for the pleasure of dabbling in stocks,I stayed away till some favorable chance should presentitself of carrying my wish into execution. Your offer,however, smooths all difficulties, and I have only to askyou, my dear M. de Morcerf" (these words were accompanied bya most peculiar smile), "whether you undertake, upon myarrival in France, to open to me the doors of thatfashionable world of which I know no more than a Huron or anative of Cochin-China?"

　　"Oh, that I do, and with infinite pleasure," answeredAlbert; "and so much the more readily as a letter receivedthis morning from my father summons me to Paris, inconsequence of a treaty of marriage (my dear Franz, do notsmile, I beg of you) with a family of high standing, andconnected with the very cream of Parisian society."

　　"Connected by marriage, you mean," said Franz, laughingly.

　　"Well, never mind how it is," answered Albert, "it comes tothe same thing in the end. Perhaps by the time you return toParis, I shall be quite a sober, staid father of a family! Amost edifying representative I shall make of all thedomestic virtues -- don't you think so? But as regards yourwish to visit our fine city, my dear count, I can only saythat you may command me and mine to any extent you please."

　　"Then it is settled," said the count, "and I give you mysolemn assurance that I only waited an opportunity like thepresent to realize plans that I have long meditated." Franzdid not doubt that these plans were the same concerningwhich the count had dropped a few words in the grotto ofMonte Cristo, and while the Count was speaking the young manwatched him closely, hoping to read something of his purposein his face, but his countenance was inscrutable especiallywhen, as in the present case, it was veiled in a sphinx-likesmile. "But tell me now, count," exclaimed Albert, delightedat the idea of having to chaperon so distinguished a personas Monte Cristo; "tell me truly whether you are in earnest,or if this project of visiting Paris is merely one of thechimerical and uncertain air castles of which we make somany in the course of our lives, but which, like a housebuilt on the sand, is liable to be blown over by the firstpuff of wind?"

　　"I pledge you my honor," returned the count, "that I mean todo as I have said; both inclination and positive necessitycompel me to visit Paris."

　　"When do you propose going thither?"

　　"Have you made up your mind when you shall be thereyourself?"

　　"Certainly I have; in a fortnight or three weeks' time, thatis to say, as fast as I can get there!"

　　"Nay," said the Count; "I will give you three months ere Ijoin you; you see I make an ample allowance for all delaysand difficulties.

　　"And in three months' time," said Albert, "you will be at myhouse?"

　　"Shall we make a positive appointment for a particular dayand hour?" inquired the count; "only let me warn you that Iam proverbial for my punctilious exactitude in keeping myengagements."

　　"Day for day, hour for hour," said Albert; "that will suitme to a dot."

　　"So be it, then," replied the count, and extending his handtowards a calendar, suspended near the chimney-piece, hesaid, "to-day is the 21st of February;" and drawing out hiswatch, added, "it is exactly half-past ten o'clock. Nowpromise me to remember this, and expect me the 21st of Mayat the same hour in the forenoon."

　　"Capital," exclaimed Albert; "your breakfast shall bewaiting."

　　"Where do you live?"

　　"No. 27, Rue du Helder."

　　"Have you bachelor's apartments there? I hope my coming willnot put you to any inconvenience."

　　"I reside in my father's house, but occupy a pavilion at thefarther side of the court-yard, entirely separated from themain building."

　　"Quite sufficient," replied the count, as, taking out histablets, he wrote down "No. 27, Rue du Helder, 21st May,half-past ten in the morning."

　　"Now then," said the count, returning his tablets to hispocket, "make yourself perfectly easy; the hand of yourtime-piece will not be more accurate in marking the timethan myself."

　　"Shall I see you again ere my departure?" asked Albert.

　　"That depends; when do you leave?"

　　"To-morrow evening, at five o'clock."

　　"In that case I must say adieu to you, as I am compelled togo to Naples, and shall not return hither before Saturdayevening or Sunday morning. And you, baron," pursued thecount, addressing Franz, "do you also depart to-morrow?"

　　"Yes."

　　"For France?"

　　"No, for Venice; I shall remain in Italy for another year ortwo."

　　"Then we shall not meet in Paris?"

　　"I fear I shall not have that honor."

　　"Well, since we must part," said the count, holding out ahand to each of the young men, "allow me to wish you both asafe and pleasant journey." It was the first time the handof Franz had come in contact with that of the mysteriousindividual before him, and unconsciously he shuddered at itstouch, for it felt cold and icy as that of a corpse. "Let usunderstand each other," said Albert; "it is agreed -- is itnot? -- that you are to be at No. 27, in the Rue du Helder,on the 21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, andyour word of honor passed for your punctuality?"

　　"The 21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, Rue duHelder, No. 27," replied the Count. The young men then rose,and bowing to the count, quitted the room. "What is thematter?" asked Albert of Franz, when they had returned totheir own apartments; "you seem more than commonlythoughtful."

　　"I will confess to you, Albert," replied Franz, "the countis a very singular person, and the appointment you have madeto meet him in Paris fills me with a thousandapprehensions."

　　"My dear fellow," exclaimed Albert, "what can there possiblybe in that to excite uneasiness? Why, you must have lostyour senses."

　　"Whether I am in my senses or not," answered Franz, "that isthe way I feel."

　　"Listen to me, Franz," said Albert; "I am glad that theoccasion has presented itself for saying this to you, for Ihave noticed how cold you are in your bearing towards thecount, while he, on the other hand, has always been courtesyitself to us. Have you anything particular against him?"

　　"Possibly."

　　"Did you ever meet him previously to coming hither?"

　　"I have."

　　"And where?"

　　"Will you promise me not to repeat a single word of what Iam about to tell you?"

　　"I promise."

　　"Upon your honor?"

　　"Upon my honor."

　　"Then listen to me." Franz then related to his friend thehistory of his excursion to the Island of Monte Cristo andof his finding a party of smugglers there, and the twoCorsican bandits with them. He dwelt with considerable forceand energy on the almost magical hospitality he had receivedfrom the count, and the magnificence of his entertainment inthe grotto of the "Thousand and One Nights." He recounted,with circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of thesupper, the hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at hisawakening, there remained no proof or trace of all theseevents, save the small yacht, seen in the distant horizondriving under full sail toward Porto-Vecchio. Then hedetailed the conversation overheard by him at the Colosseum,between the count and Vampa, in which the count had promisedto obtain the release of the bandit Peppino, -- anengagement which, as our readers are aware, he mostfaithfully fulfilled. At last he arrived at the adventure ofthe preceding night, and the embarrassment in which he foundhimself placed by not having sufficient cash by six or sevenhundred piastres to make up the sum required, and finally ofhis application to the count and the picturesque andsatisfactory result that followed. Albert listened with themost profound attention. "Well," said he, when Franz hadconcluded, "what do you find to object to in all you haverelated? The count is fond of travelling, and, being rich,possesses a vessel of his own. Go but to Portsmouth orSouthampton, and you will find the harbors crowded with theyachts belonging to such of the English as can afford theexpense, and have the same liking for this amusement. Now,by way of having a resting-place during his excursions,avoiding the wretched cookery -- which has been trying itsbest to poison me during the last four months, while youhave manfully resisted its effects for as many years, -- andobtaining a bed on which it is possible to slumber, MonteCristo has furnished for himself a temporary abode where youfirst found him; but, to prevent the possibility of theTuscan government taking a fancy to his enchanted palace,and thereby depriving him of the advantages naturallyexpected from so large an outlay of capital, he has wiselyenough purchased the island, and taken its name. Just askyourself, my good fellow, whether there are not many personsof our acquaintance who assume the names of lands andproperties they never in their lives were masters of?"

　　"But," said Franz, "the Corsican bandits that were among thecrew of his vessel?"

　　"Why, really the thing seems to me simple enough. Nobodyknows better than yourself that the bandits of Corsica arenot rogues or thieves, but purely and simply fugitives,driven by some sinister motive from their native town orvillage, and that their fellowship involves no disgrace orstigma; for my own part, I protest that, should I ever go toCorsica, my first visit, ere even I presented myself to themayor or prefect, should be to the bandits of Colomba, if Icould only manage to find them; for, on my conscience, theyare a race of men I admire greatly."

　　"Still," persisted Franz, "I suppose you will allow thatsuch men as Vampa and his band are regular villains, whohave no other motive than plunder when they seize yourperson. How do you explain the influence the count evidentlypossessed over those ruffians?"

　　"My good friend, as in all probability I own my presentsafety to that influence, it would ill become me to searchtoo closely into its source; therefore, instead ofcondemning him for his intimacy with outlaws, you must giveme leave to excuse any little irregularity there may be insuch a connection; not altogether for preserving my life,for my own idea was that it never was in much danger, butcertainly for saving me 4,000 piastres, which, beingtranslated, means neither more nor less than 24,000 livresof our money -- a sum at which, most assuredly, I shouldnever have been estimated in France, proving mostindisputably," added Albert with a laugh, "that no prophetis honored in his own country."

　　"Talking of countries," replied Franz, "of what country isthe count, what is his native tongue, whence does he derivehis immense fortune, and what were those events of his earlylife -- a life as marvellous as unknown -- that havetinctured his succeeding years with so dark and gloomy amisanthropy? Certainly these are questions that, in yourplace, I should like to have answered."

　　"My dear Franz," replied Albert, "when, upon receipt of myletter, you found the necessity of asking the count'sassistance, you promptly went to him, saying, `My friendAlbert de Morcerf is in danger; help me to deliver him.' Wasnot that nearly what you said?"

　　"It was."

　　"Well, then, did he ask you, `Who is M. Albert de Morcerf?how does he come by his name -- his fortune? what are hismeans of existence? what is his birthplace! of what countryis he a native?' Tell me, did he put all these questions toyou?"

　　"I confess he asked me none."

　　"No; he merely came and freed me from the hands of SignorVampa, where, I can assure you, in spite of all my outwardappearance of ease and unconcern, I did not veryparticularly care to remain. Now, then, Franz, when, forservices so promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he butasks me in return to do for him what is done daily for anyRussian prince or Italian nobleman who may pass throughParis -- merely to introduce him into society -- would youhave me refuse? My good fellow, you must have lost yoursenses to think it possible I could act with suchcold-blooded policy." And this time it must be confessedthat, contrary to the usual state of affairs in discussionsbetween the young men, the effective arguments were all onAlbert's side.

　　"Well," said Franz with a sigh, "do as you please my dearviscount, for your arguments are beyond my powers ofrefutation. Still, in spite of all, you must admit that thisCount of Monte Cristo is a most singular personage."

　　"He is a philanthropist," answered the other; "and no doubthis motive in visiting Paris is to compete for the Monthyonprize, given, as you are aware, to whoever shall be provedto have most materially advanced the interests of virtue andhumanity. If my vote and interest can obtain it for him, Iwill readily give him the one and promise the other. Andnow, my dear Franz, let us talk of something else. Come,shall we take our luncheon, and then pay a last visit to St.Peter's?" Franz silently assented; and the followingafternoon, at half-past five o'clock, the young men parted.Albert de Morcerf to return to Paris, and Franz d'Epinay topass a fortnight at Venice. But, ere he entered histravelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his expected guestmight forget the engagement he had entered into, placed inthe care of a waiter at the hotel a card to be delivered tothe Count of Monte Cristo, on which, beneath the name ofVicomte Albert de Morcerf, he had written in pencil -- "27,Rue du Helder, on the 21st May, half-past ten A.M."

　　Chapter 39The Guests.

　　In the house in the Rue du Helder, where Albert had invitedthe Count of Monte Cristo, everything was being prepared onthe morning of the 21st of May to do honor to the occasion.Albert de Morcerf inhabited a pavilion situated at thecorner of a large court, and directly opposite anotherbuilding, in which were the servants' apartments. Twowindows only of the pavilion faced the street; three otherwindows looked into the court, and two at the back into thegarden. Between the court and the garden, built in the heavystyle of the imperial architecture, was the large andfashionable dwelling of the Count and Countess of Morcerf. Ahigh wall surrounded the whole of the hotel, surmounted atintervals by vases filled with flowers, and broken in thecentre by a large gate of gilded iron, which served as thecarriage entrance. A small door, close to the lodge of theconcierge, gave ingress and egress to the servants andmasters when they were on foot.

　　It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother,unwilling to part from her son, and yet aware that a youngman of the viscount's age required the full exercise of hisliberty, had chosen this habitation for Albert. There werenot lacking, however, evidences of what we may call theintelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with theindolent, careless life of an only son, and who lives as itwere in a gilded cage. By means of the two windows lookinginto the street, Albert could see all that passed; the sightof what is going on is necessary to young men, who alwayswant to see the world traverse their horizon, even if thathorizon is only a public thoroughfare. Then, should anythingappear to merit a more minute examination, Albert de Morcerfcould follow up his researches by means of a small gate,similar to that close to the concierge's door, and whichmerits a particular description. It was a little entrancethat seemed never to have been opened since the house wasbuilt, so entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; butthe well-oiled hinges and locks told quite another story.This door was a mockery to the concierge, from whosevigilance and jurisdiction it was free, and, like thatfamous portal in the "Arabian Nights," opening at the"Sesame" of Ali Baba, it was wont to swing backward at acabalistic word or a concerted tap from without from thesweetest voices or whitest fingers in the world. At the endof a long corridor, with which the door communicated, andwhich formed the ante-chamber, was, on the right, Albert'sbreakfast-room, looking into the court, and on the left thesalon, looking into the garden. Shrubs and creeping plantscovered the windows, and hid from the garden and court thesetwo apartments, the only rooms into which, as they were onthe ground-floor, the prying eyes of the curious couldpenetrate. On the floor above were similar rooms, with theaddition of a third, formed out of the ante-chamber; thesethree rooms were a salon, a boudoir, and a bedroom. Thesalon down-stairs was only an Algerian divan, for the use ofsmokers. The boudoir up-stairs communicated with thebed-chamber by an invisible door on the staircase; it wasevident that every precaution had been taken. Above thisfloor was a large atelier, which had been increased in sizeby pulling down the partitions -- a pandemonium, in whichthe artist and the dandy strove for preeminence. There werecollected and piled up all Albert's successive caprices,hunting-horns, bass-viols, flutes -- a whole orchestra, forAlbert had had not a taste but a fancy for music; easels,palettes, brushes, pencils -- for music had been succeededby painting; foils, boxing-gloves, broadswords, andsingle-sticks -- for, following the example of thefashionable young men of the time, Albert de Morcerfcultivated, with far more perseverance than music anddrawing, the three arts that complete a dandy's education,i.e., fencing, boxing, and single-stick; and it was herethat he received Grisier, Cook, and Charles Leboucher. Therest of the furniture of this privileged apartment consistedof old cabinets, filled with Chinese porcelain and Japanesevases, Lucca della Robbia faience, and Palissy platters; ofold arm-chairs, in which perhaps had sat Henry IV. or Sully,Louis XIII. or Richelieu -- for two of these arm-chairs,adorned with a carved shield, on which were engraved thefleur-de-lis of France on an azure field evidently came fromthe Louvre, or, at least, some royal residence. Over thesedark and sombre chairs were thrown splendid stuffs, dyedbeneath Persia's sun, or woven by the fingers of the womenof Calcutta or of Chandernagor. What these stuffs did there,it was impossible to say; they awaited, while gratifying theeyes, a destination unknown to their owner himself; in themeantime they filled the place with their golden and silkyreflections. In the centre of the room was a Roller andBlanchet "baby grand" piano in rosewood, but holding thepotentialities of an orchestra in its narrow and sonorouscavity, and groaning beneath the weight of thechefs-d'oeuvre of Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, Haydn, Gretry,and Porpora. On the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling,were swords, daggers, Malay creeses, maces, battle-axes;gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits of armor; dried plants,minerals, and stuffed birds, their flame-colored wingsoutspread in motionless flight, and their beaks foreveropen. This was Albert's favorite lounging place.

　　However, the morning of the appointment, the young man hadestablished himself in the small salon down-stairs. There,on a table, surrounded at some distance by a large andluxurious divan, every species of tobacco known, -- from theyellow tobacco of Petersburg to the black of Sinai, and soon along the scale from Maryland and Porto-Rico, to Latakia,-- was exposed in pots of crackled earthenware of which theDutch are so fond; beside them, in boxes of fragrant wood,were ranged, according to their size and quality, pueros,regalias, havanas, and manillas; and, in an open cabinet, acollection of German pipes, of chibouques, with their ambermouth-pieces ornamented with coral, and of narghiles, withtheir long tubes of morocco, awaiting the caprice or thesympathy of the smokers. Albert had himself presided at thearrangement, or, rather, the symmetrical derangement, which,after coffee, the guests at a breakfast of modern days loveto contemplate through the vapor that escapes from theirmouths, and ascends in long and fanciful wreaths to theceiling. At a quarter to ten, a valet entered; he composed,with a little groom named John, and who only spoke English,all Albert's establishment, although the cook of the hotelwas always at his service, and on great occasions thecount's chasseur also. This valet, whose name was Germain,and who enjoyed the entire confidence of his young master,held in one hand a number of papers, and in the other apacket of letters, which he gave to Albert. Albert glancedcarelessly at the different missives, selected two writtenin a small and delicate hand, and enclosed in scentedenvelopes, opened them and perused their contents with someattention. "How did these letters come?" said he.

　　"One by the post, Madame Danglars' footman left the other."

　　"Let Madame Danglars know that I accept the place she offersme in her box. Wait; then, during the day, tell Rosa thatwhen I leave the Opera I will sup with her as she wishes.Take her six bottles of different wine -- Cyprus, sherry,and Malaga, and a barrel of Ostend oysters; get them atBorel's, and be sure you say they are for me."

　　"At what o'clock, sir, do you breakfast?"

　　"What time is it now?"

　　"A quarter to ten."

　　"Very well, at half past ten. Debray will, perhaps, beobliged to go to the minister -- and besides" (Albert lookedat his tablets), "it is the hour I told the count, 21st May,at half past ten; and though I do not much rely upon hispromise, I wish to be punctual. Is the countess up yet?"

　　"If you wish, I will inquire."

　　"Yes, ask her for one of her liqueur cellarets, mine isincomplete; and tell her I shall have the honor of seeingher about three o'clock, and that I request permission tointroduce some one to her." The valet left the room. Albertthrew himself on the divan, tore off the cover of two orthree of the papers, looked at the theatre announcements,made a face seeing they gave an opera, and not a ballet;hunted vainly amongst the advertisements for a newtooth-powder of which he had heard, and threw down, oneafter the other, the three leading papers of Paris,muttering, "These papers become more and more stupid everyday." A moment after, a carriage stopped before the door,and the servant announced M. Lucien Debray. A tall youngman, with light hair, clear gray eyes, and thin andcompressed lips, dressed in a blue coat with beautifullycarved gold buttons, a white neckcloth, and a tortoiseshelleye-glass suspended by a silken thread, and which, by aneffort of the superciliary and zygomatic muscles, he fixedin his eye, entered, with a half-official air, withoutsmiling or speaking. "Good-morning, Lucien, good-morning,"said Albert; "your punctuality really alarms me. What do Isay? punctuality! You, whom I expected last, you arrive atfive minutes to ten, when the time fixed was half-past! Hasthe ministry resigned?"

　　"No, my dear fellow," returned the young man, seatinghimself on the divan; "reassure yourself; we are totteringalways, but we never fall, and I begin to believe that weshall pass into a state of immobility, and then the affairsof the Peninsula will completely consolidate us."

　　"Ah, true; you drive Don Carlos out of Spain."

　　"No, no, my dear fellow, do not confound our plans. We takehim to the other side of the French frontier, and offer himhospitality at Bourges."

　　"At Bourges?"

　　"Yes, he has not much to complain of; Bourges is the capitalof Charles VII. Do you not know that all Paris knew ityesterday, and the day before it had already transpired onthe Bourse, and M. Danglars (I do not know by what meansthat man contrives to obtain intelligence as soon as we do)made a million!"

　　"And you another order, for I see you have a blue ribbon atyour button-hole."

　　"Yes; they sent me the order of Charles III.," returnedDebray, carelessly.

　　"Come, do not affect indifference, but confess you werepleased to have it."

　　"Oh, it is very well as a finish to the toilet. It looksvery neat on a black coat buttoned up."

　　"And makes you resemble the Prince of Wales or the Duke ofReichstadt."

　　"It is for that reason you see me so early."

　　"Because you have the order of Charles III., and you wish toannounce the good news to me?"

　　"No, because I passed the night writing letters, -- five andtwenty despatches. I returned home at daybreak, and stroveto sleep; but my head ached and I got up to have a ride foran hour. At the Bois de Boulogne, ennui and hunger attackedme at once, -- two enemies who rarely accompany each other,and who are yet leagued against me, a sort ofCarlo-republican alliance. I then recollected you gave abreakfast this morning, and here I am. I am hungry, feed me;I am bored, amuse me."

　　"It is my duty as your host," returned Albert, ringing thebell, while Lucien turned over, with his gold-mounted cane,the papers that lay on the table. "Germain, a glass ofsherry and a biscuit. In the meantime. my dear Lucien, hereare cigars -- contraband, of course -- try them, andpersuade the minister to sell us such instead of poisoningus with cabbage leaves."

　　"Peste, I will do nothing of the kind; the moment they comefrom government you would find them execrable. Besides, thatdoes not concern the home but the financial department.Address yourself to M. Humann, section of the indirectcontributions, corridor A., No. 26."

　　"On my word," said Albert, "you astonish me by the extent ofyour knowledge. Take a cigar."

　　"Really, my dear Albert," replied Lucien, lighting a manillaat a rose-colored taper that burnt in a be beautifullyenamelled stand -- "how happy you are to have nothing to do.You do not know your own good fortune!"

　　"And what would you do, my dear diplomatist," repliedMorcerf, with a slight degree of irony in his voice, "if youdid nothing? What? private secretary to a minister, plungedat once into European cabals and Parisian intrigues; havingkings, and, better still, queens, to protect, parties tounite, elections to direct; making more use of your cabinetwith your pen and your telegraph than Napoleon did of hisbattle-fields with his sword and his victories; possessingfive and twenty thousand francs a year, besides your place;a horse, for which Chateau-Renaud offered you four hundredlouis, and which you would not part with; a tailor who neverdisappoints you; with the opera, the jockey-club, and otherdiversions, can you not amuse yourself? Well, I will amuseyou."

　　"How?"

　　"By introducing to you a new acquaintance."

　　"A man or a woman?"

　　"A man."

　　"I know so many men already."

　　"But you do not know this man."

　　"Where does he come from -- the end of the world?"

　　"Farther still, perhaps."

　　"The deuce! I hope he does not bring our breakfast withhim."

　　"Oh, no; our breakfast comes from my father's kitchen. Areyou hungry?"

　　"Humiliating as such a confession is, I am. But I dined atM. de Villefort's, and lawyers always give you very baddinners. You would think they felt some remorse; did youever remark that?"

　　"Ah, depreciate other persons' dinners; you ministers givesuch splendid ones."

　　"Yes; but we do not invite people of fashion. If we were notforced to entertain a parcel of country boobies because theythink and vote with us, we should never dream of dining athome, I assure you."

　　"Well, take another glass of sherry and another biscuit."

　　"Willingly. Your Spanish wine is excellent. You see we werequite right to pacify that country."

　　"Yes; but Don Carlos?"

　　"Well, Don Carlos will drink Bordeaux, and in ten years wewill marry his son to the little queen."

　　"You will then obtain the Golden Fleece, if you are still inthe ministry."

　　"I think, Albert, you have adopted the system of feeding meon smoke this morning."

　　"Well, you must allow it is the best thing for the stomach;but I hear Beauchamp in the next room; you can disputetogether, and that will pass away the time."

　　"About what?"

　　"About the papers."

　　"My dear friend," said Lucien with an air of sovereigncontempt, "do I ever read the papers?"

　　"Then you will dispute the more."

　　"M. Beauchamp," announced the servant. "Come in, come in,"said Albert, rising and advancing to meet the young man."Here is Debray, who detests you without reading you, so hesays."

　　"He is quite right," returned Beauchamp; "for I criticisehim without knowing what he does. Good-day, commander!"

　　"Ah, you know that already," said the private secretary,smiling and shaking hands with him.

　　"Pardieu?"

　　"And what do they say of it in the world?"

　　"In which world? we have so many worlds in the year of grace1838."

　　"In the entire political world, of which you are one of theleaders."

　　"They say that it is quite fair, and that sowing so muchred, you ought to reap a little blue."

　　"Come, come, that is not bad!" said Lucien. "Why do you notjoin our party, my dear Beauchamp? With your talents youwould make your fortune in three or four years."

　　"I only await one thing before following your advice; thatis, a minister who will hold office for six months. My dearAlbert, one word, for I must give poor Lucien a respite. Dowe breakfast or dine? I must go to the Chamber, for our lifeis not an idle one."

　　"You only breakfast; I await two persons, and the instantthey arrive we shall sit down to table."

　　Chapter 40The Breakfast.

　　"And what sort of persons do you expect to breakfast?" saidBeauchamp.

　　"A gentleman, and a diplomatist."

　　"Then we shall have to wait two hours for the gentleman, andthree for the diplomatist. I shall come back to dessert;keep me some strawberries, coffee, and cigars. I shall takea cutlet on my way to the Chamber."

　　"Do not do anything of the sort; for were the gentleman aMontmorency, and the diplomatist a Metternich, we willbreakfast at eleven; in the meantime, follow Debray'sexample, and take a glass of sherry and a biscuit."

　　"Be it so; I will stay; I must do something to distract mythoughts."

　　"You are like Debray, and yet it seems to me that when theminister is out of spirits, the opposition ought to bejoyous."

　　"Ah, you do not know with what I am threatened. I shall hearthis morning that M. Danglars make a speech at the Chamberof Deputies, and at his wife's this evening I shall hear thetragedy of a peer of France. The devil take theconstitutional government, and since we had our choice, asthey say, at least, how could we choose that?"

　　"I understand; you must lay in a stock of hilarity."

　　"Do not run down M. Danglars' speeches," said Debray; "hevotes for you, for he belongs to the opposition."

　　"Pardieu, that is exactly the worst of all. I am waitinguntil you send him to speak at the Luxembourg, to laugh atmy ease."

　　"My dear friend," said Albert to Beauchamp, "it is plainthat the affairs of Spain are settled, for you are mostdesperately out of humor this morning. Recollect thatParisian gossip has spoken of a marriage between myself andMlle. Eugenie Danglars; I cannot in conscience, therefore,let you run down the speeches of a man who will one day sayto me, `Vicomte, you know I give my daughter two millions.'"

　　"Ah, this marriage will never take place," said Beauchamp."The king has made him a baron, and can make him a peer, buthe cannot make him a gentleman, and the Count of Morcerf istoo aristocratic to consent, for the paltry sum of twomillion francs, to a mesalliance. The Viscount of Morcerfcan only wed a marchioness."

　　"But two million francs make a nice little sum," repliedMorcerf.

　　"It is the social capital of a theatre on the boulevard, ora railroad from the Jardin des Plantes to La Rapee."

　　"Never mind what he says, Morcerf," said Debray, "do youmarry her. You marry a money-bag label, it is true; well,but what does that matter? It is better to have a blazonless and a figure more on it. You have seven martlets onyour arms; give three to your wife, and you will still havefour; that is one more than M. de Guise had, who so nearlybecame King of France, and whose cousin was Emperor ofGermany."

　　"On my word, I think you are right, Lucien," said Albertabsently.

　　"To be sure; besides, every millionaire is as noble as abastard -- that is, he can be."

　　"Do not say that, Debray," returned Beauchamp, laughing,"for here is Chateau-Renaud, who, to cure you of your maniafor paradoxes, will pass the sword of Renaud de Montauban,his ancestor, through your body."

　　"He will sully it then," returned Lucien; "for I am low --very low."

　　"Oh, heavens," cried Beauchamp, "the minister quotesBeranger, what shall we come to next?"

　　"M. de Chateau-Renaud -- M. Maximilian Morrel," said theservant, announcing two fresh guests.

　　"Now, then, to breakfast," said Beauchamp; "for, if Iremember, you told me you only expected two persons,Albert."

　　"Morrel," muttered Albert -- "Morrel -- who is he?" Butbefore he had finished, M. de Chateau-Renaud, a handsomeyoung man of thirty, gentleman all over, -- that is, withthe figure of a Guiche and the wit of a Mortemart, -- tookAlbert's hand. "My dear Albert," said he, "let me introduceto you M. Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend;and what is more -- however the man speaks for himself ---mypreserver. Salute my hero, viscount." And he stepped on oneside to give place to a young man of refined and dignifiedbearing, with large and open brow, piercing eyes, and blackmustache, whom our readers have already seen at Marseilles,under circumstances sufficiently dramatic not to beforgotten. A rich uniform, half French, half Oriental, setoff his graceful and stalwart figure, and his broad chestwas decorated with the order of the Legion of Honor. Theyoung officer bowed with easy and elegant politeness."Monsieur," said Albert with affectionate courtesy, "thecount of Chateau-Renaud knew how much pleasure thisintroduction would give me; you are his friend, be oursalso."

　　"Well said," interrupted Chateau-Renaud; "and pray that, ifyou should ever be in a similar predicament, he may do asmuch for you as he did for me."

　　"What has he done?" asked Albert.

　　"Oh, nothing worth speaking of," said Morrel; "M. deChateau-Renaud exaggerates."

　　"Not worth speaking of?" cried Chateau-Renaud; "life is notworth speaking of! -- that is rather too philosophical, onmy word, Morrel. It is very well for you, who risk your lifeevery day, but for me, who only did so once" --

　　"We gather from all this, baron, that Captain Morrel savedyour life."

　　"Exactly so."

　　"On what occasion?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"Beauchamp, my good fellow, you know I am starving," saidDebray: "do not set him off on some long story."

　　"Well, I do not prevent your sitting down to table," repliedBeauchamp, "Chateau-Renaud can tell us while we eat ourbreakfast."

　　"Gentlemen," said Morcerf, "it is only a quarter past ten,and I expect some one else."

　　"Ah, true, a diplomatist!" observed Debray.

　　"Diplomat or not, I don't know; I only know that he chargedhimself on my account with a mission, which he terminated soentirely to my satisfaction, that had I been king, I shouldhave instantly created him knight of all my orders, even hadI been able to offer him the Golden Fleece and the Garter."

　　"Well, since we are not to sit down to table," said Debray,"take a glass of sherry, and tell us all about it."

　　"You all know that I had the fancy of going to Africa."

　　"It is a road your ancestors have traced for you," saidAlbert gallantly.

　　"Yes? but I doubt that your object was like theirs -- torescue the Holy Sepulchre."

　　"You are quite right, Beauchamp," observed the youngaristocrat. "It was only to fight as an amateur. I cannotbear duelling since two seconds, whom I had chosen toarrange an affair, forced me to break the arm of one of mybest friends, one whom you all know -- poor Franz d'Epinay."

　　"Ah, true," said Debray, "you did fight some time ago; aboutwhat?"

　　"The devil take me, if I remember," returned Chateau-Renaud."But I recollect perfectly one thing, that, being unwillingto let such talents as mine sleep, I wished to try upon theArabs the new pistols that had been given to me. Inconsequence I embarked for Oran, and went from thence toConstantine, where I arrived just in time to witness theraising of the siege. I retreated with the rest, for eightand forty hours. I endured the rain during the day, and thecold during the night tolerably well, but the third morningmy horse died of cold. Poor brute -- accustomed to becovered up and to have a stove in the stable, the Arabianfinds himself unable to bear ten degrees of cold in Arabia."

　　"That's why you want to purchase my English horse," saidDebray, "you think he will bear the cold better."

　　"You are mistaken, for I have made a vow never to return toAfrica."

　　"You were very much frightened, then?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"Well, yes, and I had good reason to be so," repliedChateau-Renaud. "I was retreating on foot, for my horse wasdead. Six Arabs came up, full gallop, to cut off my head. Ishot two with my double-barrelled gun, and two more with mypistols, but I was then disarmed, and two were still left;one seized me by the hair (that is why I now wear it soshort, for no one knows what may happen), the other swung ayataghan, and I already felt the cold steel on my neck, whenthis gentleman whom you see here charged them, shot the onewho held me by the hair, and cleft the skull of the otherwith his sabre. He had assigned himself the task of saving aman's life that day; chance caused that man to be myself.When I am rich I will order a statue of Chance from Klagmannor Marochetti."

　　"Yes," said Morrel, smiling, "it was the 5th of September,the anniversary of the day on which my father wasmiraculously preserved; therefore, as far as it lies in mypower, I endeavor to celebrate it by some" --

　　"Heroic action," interrupted Chateau-Renaud. "I was chosen.But that is not all -- after rescuing me from the sword, herescued me from the cold, not by sharing his cloak with me,like St. Martin, but by giving me the whole; then fromhunger by sharing with me -- guess what?"

　　"A Strasbourg pie?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"No, his horse; of which we each of us ate a slice with ahearty appetite. It was very hard."

　　"The horse?" said Morcerf, laughing.

　　"No, the sacrifice," returned Chateau-Renaud; "ask Debray ifhe would sacrifice his English steed for a stranger?"

　　"Not for a stranger," said Debray, "but for a friend Imight, perhaps."

　　"I divined that you would become mine, count," repliedMorrel; "besides, as I had the honor to tell you, heroism ornot, sacrifice or not, that day I owed an offering to badfortune in recompense for the favors good fortune had onother days granted to us."

　　"The history to which M. Morrel alludes," continuedChateau-Renaud, "is an admirable one, which he will tell yousome day when you are better acquainted with him; to-day letus fill our stomachs, and not our memories. What time do youbreakfast, Albert?"

　　"At half-past ten."

　　"Precisely?" asked Debray, taking out his watch.

　　"Oh, you will give me five minutes' grace," replied Morcerf,"for I also expect a preserver."

　　"Of whom?"

　　"Of myself," cried Morcerf; "parbleu, do you think I cannotbe saved as well as any one else, and that there are onlyArabs who cut off heads? Our breakfast is a philanthropicone, and we shall have at table -- at least, I hope so --two benefactors of humanity."

　　"What shall we do?" said Debray; "we have only one Monthyonprize."

　　"Well, it will be given to some one who has done nothing todeserve it," said Beauchamp; "that is the way the Academymostly escapes from the dilemma."

　　"And where does he come from?" asked Debray. "You havealready answered the question once, but so vaguely that Iventure to put it a second time."

　　"Really," said Albert, "I do not know; when I invited himthree months ago, he was then at Rome, but since that timewho knows where he may have gone?"

　　"And you think him capable of being exact?" demanded Debray.

　　"I think him capable of everything."

　　"Well, with the five minutes' grace, we have only ten left."

　　"I will profit by them to tell you something about myguest."

　　"I beg pardon," interrupted Beauchamp; "are there anymaterials for an article in what you are going to tell us?"

　　"Yes, and for a most curious one."

　　"Go on, then, for I see I shall not get to the Chamber thismorning, and I must make up for it."

　　"I was at Rome during the last Carnival."

　　"We know that," said Beauchamp.

　　"Yes, but what you do not know is that I was carried off bybandits."

　　"There are no bandits," cried Debray.

　　"Yes there are, and most hideous, or rather most admirableones, for I found them ugly enough to frighten me."

　　"Come, my dear Albert," said Debray, "confess that your cookis behindhand, that the oysters have not arrived from Ostendor Marennes, and that, like Madame de Maintenon, you aregoing to replace the dish by a story. Say so at once; we aresufficiently well-bred to excuse you, and to listen to yourhistory, fabulous as it promises to be."

　　"And I say to you, fabulous as it may seem, I tell it as atrue one from beginning to end. The brigands had carried meoff, and conducted me to a gloomy spot, called the Catacombsof Saint Sebastian."

　　"I know it," said Chateau-Renaud; "I narrowly escapedcatching a fever there."

　　"And I did more than that," replied Morcerf, "for I caughtone. I was informed that I was prisoner until I paid the sumof 4,000 Roman crowns -- about 24,000 francs. Unfortunately,I had not above 1,500. I was at the end of my journey and ofmy credit. I wrote to Franz -- and were he here he wouldconfirm every word -- I wrote then to Franz that if he didnot come with the four thousand crowns before six, at tenminutes past I should have gone to join the blessed saintsand glorious martyrs in whose company I had the honor ofbeing; and Signor Luigi Vampa, such was the name of thechief of these bandits, would have scrupulously kept hisword."

　　"But Franz did come with the four thousand crowns," saidChateau-Renaud. "A man whose name is Franz d'Epinay orAlbert de Morcerf has not much difficulty in procuringthem."

　　"No, he arrived accompanied simply by the guest I am goingto present to you."

　　"Ah, this gentleman is a Hercules killing Cacus, a Perseusfreeing Andromeda."

　　"No, he is a man about my own size."

　　"Armed to the teeth?"

　　"He had not even a knitting-needle."

　　"But he paid your ransom?"

　　"He said two words to the chief and I was free."

　　"And they apologized to him for having carried you off?"said Beauchamp.

　　"Just so."

　　"Why, he is a second Ariosto."

　　"No, his name is the Count of Monte Cristo."

　　"There is no Count of Monte Cristo" said Debray.

　　"I do not think so," added Chateau-Renaud, with the air of aman who knows the whole of the European nobility perfectly.

　　"Does any one know anything of a Count of Monte Cristo?"

　　"He comes possibly from the Holy Land, and one of hisancestors possessed Calvary, as the Mortemarts did the DeadSea."

　　"I think I can assist your researches," said Maximilian."Monte Cristo is a little island I have often heard spokenof by the old sailors my father employed -- a grain of sandin the centre of the Mediterranean, an atom in theinfinite."

　　"Precisely!" cried Albert. "Well, he of whom I speak is thelord and master of this grain of sand, of this atom; he haspurchased the title of count somewhere in Tuscany."

　　"He is rich, then?"

　　"I believe so."

　　"But that ought to be visible."

　　"That is what deceives you, Debray."

　　"I do not understand you."

　　"Have you read the `Arabian Nights'?"

　　"What a question!"

　　"Well, do you know if the persons you see there are rich orpoor, if their sacks of wheat are not rubies or diamonds?They seem like poor fishermen, and suddenly they open somemysterious cavern filled with the wealth of the Indies."

　　"Which means?"

　　"Which means that my Count of Monte Cristo is one of thosefishermen. He has even a name taken from the book, since hecalls himself Sinbad the Sailor, and has a cave filled withgold."

　　"And you have seen this cavern, Morcerf?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"No, but Franz has; for heaven's sake, not a word of thisbefore him. Franz went in with his eyes blindfolded, and waswaited on by mutes and by women to whom Cleopatra was apainted strumpet. Only he is not quite sure about the women,for they did not come in until after he had taken hashish,so that what he took for women might have been simply a rowof statues."

　　The two young men looked at Morcerf as if to say, -- "Areyou mad, or are you laughing at us?"

　　"And I also," said Morrel thoughtfully, "have heardsomething like this from an old sailor named Penelon."

　　"Ah," cried Albert, "it is very lucky that M. Morrel comesto aid me; you are vexed, are you not, that he thus gives aclew to the labyrinth?"

　　"My dear Albert," said Debray, "what you tell us is soextraordinary."

　　"Ah, because your ambassadors and your consuls do not tellyou of them -- they have no time. They are too much taken upwith interfering in the affairs of their countrymen whotravel."

　　"Now you get angry, and attack our poor agents. How will youhave them protect you? The Chamber cuts down their salariesevery day, so that now they have scarcely any. Will you beambassador, Albert? I will send you to Constantinople."

　　"No, lest on the first demonstration I make in favor ofMehemet Ali, the Sultan send me the bowstring, and make mysecretaries strangle me."

　　"You say very true," responded Debray.

　　"Yes," said Albert, "but this has nothing to do with theexistence of the Count of Monte Cristo."

　　"Pardieu, every one exists."

　　"Doubtless, but not in the same way; every one has not blackslaves, a princely retinue, an arsenal of weapons that woulddo credit to an Arabian fortress, horses that cost sixthousand francs apiece, and Greek mistresses."

　　"Have you seen the Greek mistress?"

　　"I have both seen and heard her. I saw her at the theatre,and heard her one morning when I breakfasted with thecount."

　　"He eats, then?"

　　"Yes; but so little, it can hardly be called eating."

　　"He must be a vampire."

　　"Laugh, if you will; the Countess G---- , who knew LordRuthven, declared that the count was a vampire."

　　"Ah, capital," said Beauchamp. "For a man not connected withnewspapers, here is the pendant to the famous sea-serpent ofthe Constitutionnel."

　　"Wild eyes, the iris of which contracts or dilates atpleasure," said Debray; "facial angle strongly developed,magnificent forehead, livid complexion, black beard, sharpand white teeth, politeness unexceptionable."

　　"Just so, Lucien," returned Morcerf; "you have described himfeature for feature. Yes, keen and cutting politeness. Thisman has often made me shudder; and one day that we wereviewing an execution, I thought I should faint, more fromhearing the cold and calm manner in which he spoke of everydescription of torture, than from the sight of theexecutioner and the culprit."

　　"Did he not conduct you to the ruins of the Colosseum andsuck your blood?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"Or, having delivered you, make you sign a flamingparchment, surrendering your soul to him as Esau did hisbirth-right?"

　　"Rail on, rail on at your ease, gentlemen," said Morcerf,somewhat piqued. "When I look at you Parisians, idlers onthe Boulevard de Gand or the Bois de Boulogne, and think ofthis man, it seems to me we are not of the same race."

　　"I am highly flattered," returned Beauchamp. "At the sametime," added Chateau-Renaud, "your Count of Monte Cristo isa very fine fellow, always excepting his little arrangementswith the Italian banditti."

　　"There are no Italian banditti," said Debray.

　　"No vampire," cried Beauchamp. "No Count of Monte Cristo"added Debray. "There is half-past ten striking, Albert."

　　"Confess you have dreamed this, and let us sit down tobreakfast," continued Beauchamp. But the sound of the clockhad not died away when Germain announced, "His excellencythe Count of Monte Cristo." The involuntary start every onegave proved how much Morcerf's narrative had impressed them,and Albert himself could not wholly refrain from manifestingsudden emotion. He had not heard a carriage stop in thestreet, or steps in the ante-chamber; the door had itselfopened noiselessly. The count appeared, dressed with thegreatest simplicity, but the most fastidious dandy couldhave found nothing to cavil at in his toilet. Every articleof dress -- hat, coat, gloves, and boots -- was from thefirst makers. He seemed scarcely five and thirty. But whatstruck everybody was his extreme resemblance to the portraitDebray had drawn. The count advanced, smiling, into thecentre of the room, and approached Albert, who hastenedtowards him holding out his hand in a ceremonial manner."Punctuality," said Monte Cristo, "is the politeness ofkings, according to one of your sovereigns, I think; but itis not the same with travellers. However, I hope you willexcuse the two or three seconds I am behindhand; fivehundred leagues are not to be accomplished without sometrouble, and especially in France, where, it seems, it isforbidden to beat the postilions."

　　"My dear count," replied Albert, "I was announcing yourvisit to some of my friends, whom I had invited inconsequence of the promise you did me the honor to make, andwhom I now present to you. They are the Count ofChateau-Renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelvepeers, and whose ancestors had a place at the Round Table;M. Lucien Debray, private secretary to the minister of theinterior; M. Beauchamp, an editor of a paper, and the terrorof the French government, but of whom, in spite of hisnational celebrity, you perhaps have not heard in Italy,since his paper is prohibited there; and M. MaximilianMorrel, captain of Spahis."

　　At this name the count, who had hitherto saluted every onewith courtesy, but at the same time with coldness andformality, stepped a pace forward, and a slight tinge of redcolored his pale cheeks. "You wear the uniform of the newFrench conquerors, monsieur," said he; "it is a handsomeuniform." No one could have said what caused the count'svoice to vibrate so deeply, and what made his eye flash,which was in general so clear, lustrous, and limpid when hepleased. "You have never seen our Africans, count?" saidAlbert. "Never," replied the count, who was by this timeperfectly master of himself again.

　　"Well, beneath this uniform beats one of the bravest andnoblest hearts in the whole army."

　　"Oh, M. de Morcerf," interrupted Morrel.

　　"Let me go on, captain. And we have just heard," continuedAlbert, "of a new deed of his, and so heroic a one, that,although I have seen him to-day for the first time, Irequest you to allow me to introduce him as my friend." Atthese words it was still possible to observe in Monte Cristothe concentrated look, changing color, and slight tremblingof the eyelid that show emotion. "Ah, you have a nobleheart," said the count; "so much the better." Thisexclamation, which corresponded to the count's own thoughtrather than to what Albert was saying, surprised everybody,and especially Morrel, who looked at Monte Cristo withwonder. But, at the same time, the intonation was so softthat, however strange the speech might seem, it wasimpossible to be offended at it. "Why should he doubt it?"said Beauchamp to Chateau-Renaud.

　　"In reality," replied the latter, who, with his aristocraticglance and his knowledge of the world, had penetrated atonce all that was penetrable in Monte Cristo, "Albert hasnot deceived us, for the count is a most singular being.What say you, Morrel!"

　　"Ma foi, he has an open look about him that pleases me, inspite of the singular remark he has made about me."

　　"Gentlemen," said Albert, "Germain informs me that breakfastis ready. My dear count, allow me to show you the way." Theypassed silently into the breakfast-room, and every one tookhis place. "Gentleman," said the count, seating himself,"permit me to make a confession which must form my excusefor any improprieties I may commit. I am a stranger, and astranger to such a degree, that this is the first time Ihave ever been at Paris. The French way of living is utterlyunknown to me, and up to the present time I have followedthe Eastern customs, which are entirely in contrast to theParisian. I beg you, therefore, to excuse if you findanything in me too Turkish, too Italian, or too Arabian.Now, then, let us breakfast."

　　"With what an air he says all this," muttered Beauchamp;"decidedly he is a great man."

　　"A great man in his own country," added Debray.

　　"A great man in every country, M. Debray," saidChateau-Renaud. The count was, it may be remembered, a mosttemperate guest. Albert remarked this, expressing his fearslest, at the outset, the Parisian mode of life shoulddisplease the traveller in the most essential point. "Mydear count," said he, "I fear one thing, and that is, thatthe fare of the Rue du Helder is not so much to your tasteas that of the Piazza di Spagni. I ought to have consultedyou on the point, and have had some dishes preparedexpressly."

　　"Did you know me better," returned the count, smiling, "youwould not give one thought of such a thing for a travellerlike myself, who has successively lived on maccaroni atNaples, polenta at Milan, olla podrida at Valencia, pilau atConstantinople, karrick in India, and swallows' nests inChina. I eat everywhere, and of everything, only I eat butlittle; and to-day, that you reproach me with my want ofappetite, is my day of appetite, for I have not eaten sinceyesterday morning."

　　"What," cried all the guests, "you have not eaten for fourand twenty hours?"

　　"No," replied the count; "I was forced to go out of my roadto obtain some information near Nimes, so that I wassomewhat late, and therefore I did not choose to stop."

　　"And you ate in your carriage?" asked Morcerf.

　　"No, I slept, as I generally do when I am weary withouthaving the courage to amuse myself, or when I am hungrywithout feeling inclined to eat."

　　"But you can sleep when you please, monsieur?" said Morrel.

　　"Yes."

　　"You have a recipe for it?"

　　"An infallible one."

　　"That would be invaluable to us in Africa, who have notalways any food to eat, and rarely anything to drink."

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "but, unfortunately, a recipeexcellent for a man like myself would be very dangerousapplied to an army, which might not awake when it wasneeded."

　　"May we inquire what is this recipe?" asked Debray.

　　"Oh, yes," returned Monte Cristo; "I make no secret of it.It is a mixture of excellent opium, which I fetched myselffrom Canton in order to have it pure, and the best hashishwhich grows in the East -- that is, between the Tigris andthe Euphrates. These two ingredients are mixed in equalproportions, and formed into pills. Ten minutes after one istaken, the effect is produced. Ask Baron Franz d'Epinay; Ithink he tasted them one day."

　　"Yes," replied Morcerf, "he said something about it to me."

　　"But," said Beauchamp, who, as became a journalist, was veryincredulous, "you always carry this drug about you?"

　　"Always."

　　"Would it be an indiscretion to ask to see those preciouspills?" continued Beauchamp, hoping to take him at adisadvantage.

　　"No, monsieur," returned the count; and he drew from hispocket a marvellous casket, formed out of a single emeraldand closed by a golden lid which unscrewed and gave passageto a small greenish colored pellet about the size of a pea.This ball had an acrid and penetrating odor. There were fouror five more in the emerald, which would contain about adozen. The casket passed around the table, but it was moreto examine the admirable emerald than to see the pills thatit passed from hand to hand. "And is it your cook whoprepares these pills?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"Oh, no, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo; "I do not thusbetray my enjoyments to the vulgar. I am a tolerablechemist, and prepare my pills myself."

　　"This is a magnificent emerald, and the largest I have everseen," said Chateau-Renaud, "although my mother has someremarkable family jewels."

　　"I had three similar ones," returned Monte Cristo. "I gaveone to the Sultan, who mounted it in his sabre; another toour holy father the Pope, who had it set in his tiara,opposite to one nearly as large, though not so fine, givenby the Emperor Napoleon to his predecessor, Pius VII. I keptthe third for myself, and I had it hollowed out, whichreduced its value, but rendered it more commodious for thepurpose I intended." Every one looked at Monte Cristo withastonishment; he spoke with so much simplicity that it wasevident he spoke the truth, or that he was mad. However, thesight of the emerald made them naturally incline to theformer belief. "And what did these two sovereigns give youin exchange for these magnificent presents?" asked Debray.

　　"The Sultan, the liberty of a woman," replied the Count;"the Pope, the life of a man; so that once in my life I havebeen as powerful as if heaven had brought me into the worldon the steps of a throne."

　　"And it was Peppino you saved, was it not?" cried Morcerf;"it was for him that you obtained pardon?"

　　"Perhaps," returned the count, smiling.

　　"My dear count, you have no idea what pleasure it gives meto hear you speak thus," said Morcerf. "I had announced youbeforehand to my friends as an enchanter of the `ArabianNights,' a wizard of the Middle Ages; but the Parisians areso subtle in paradoxes that they mistake for caprices of theimagination the most incontestable truths, when these truthsdo not form a part of their daily existence. For example,here is Debray who reads, and Beauchamp who prints, everyday, `A member of the Jockey Club has been stopped androbbed on the Boulevard;' `four persons have beenassassinated in the Rue St. Denis' or `the Faubourg St.Germain;' `ten, fifteen, or twenty thieves, have beenarrested in a cafe on the Boulevard du Temple, or in theThermes de Julien,' -- and yet these same men deny theexistence of the bandits in the Maremma, the Campagna diRomana, or the Pontine Marshes. Tell them yourself that Iwas taken by bandits, and that without your generousintercession I should now have been sleeping in theCatacombs of St. Sebastian, instead of receiving them in myhumble abode in the Rue du Helder."

　　"Ah," said Monte Cristo "you promised me never to mentionthat circumstance."

　　"It was not I who made that promise," cried Morcerf; "itmust have been some one else whom you have rescued in thesame manner, and whom you have forgotten. Pray speak of it,for I shall not only, I trust, relate the little I do know,but also a great deal I do not know."

　　"It seems to me," returned the count, smiling, "that youplayed a sufficiently important part to know as well asmyself what happened."

　　"Well, you promise me, if I tell all I know, to relate, inyour turn, all that I do not know?"

　　"That is but fair," replied Monte Cristo.

　　"Well," said Morcerf, "for three days I believed myself theobject of the attentions of a masque, whom I took for adescendant of Tullia or Poppoea, while I was simply theobject of the attentions of a contadina, and I say contadinato avoid saying peasant girl. What I know is, that, like afool, a greater fool than he of whom I spoke just now, Imistook for this peasant girl a young bandit of fifteen orsixteen, with a beardless chin and slim waist, and who, justas I was about to imprint a chaste salute on his lips,placed a pistol to my head, and, aided by seven or eightothers, led, or rather dragged me, to the Catacombs of St.Sebastian, where I found a highly educated brigand chiefperusing Caesar's `Commentaries,' and who deigned to leaveoff reading to inform me, that unless the next morning,before six o'clock, four thousand piastres were paid intohis account at his banker's, at a quarter past six I shouldhave ceased to exist. The letter is still to be seen, for itis in Franz d'Epinay's possession, signed by me, and with apostscript of M. Luigi Vampa. This is all I know, but I knownot, count, how you contrived to inspire so much respect inthe bandits of Rome who ordinarily have so little respectfor anything. I assure you, Franz and I were lost inadmiration."

　　"Nothing more simple," returned the count. "I had known thefamous Vampa for more than ten years. When he was quite achild, and only a shepherd, I gave him a few gold pieces forshowing me my way, and he, in order to repay me, gave me aponiard, the hilt of which he had carved with his own hand,and which you may have seen in my collection of arms. Inafter years, whether he had forgotten this interchange ofpresents, which ought to have cemented our friendship, orwhether he did not recollect me, he sought to take me, but,on the contrary, it was I who captured him and a dozen ofhis band. I might have handed him over to Roman justice,which is somewhat expeditious, and which would have beenparticularly so with him; but I did nothing of the sort -- Isuffered him and his band to depart."

　　"With the condition that they should sin no more," saidBeauchamp, laughing. "I see they kept their promise."

　　"No, monsieur," returned Monte Cristo "upon the simplecondition that they should respect myself and my friends.Perhaps what I am about to say may seem strange to you, whoare socialists, and vaunt humanity and your duty to yourneighbor, but I never seek to protect a society which doesnot protect me, and which I will even say, generallyoccupies itself about me only to injure me; and thus bygiving them a low place in my esteem, and preserving aneutrality towards them, it is society and my neighbor whoare indebted to me."

　　"Bravo," cried Chateau-Renaud; "you are the first man I evermet sufficiently courageous to preach egotism. Bravo, count,bravo!"

　　"It is frank, at least," said Morrel. "But I am sure thatthe count does not regret having once deviated from theprinciples he has so boldly avowed."

　　"How have I deviated from those principles, monsieur?" askedMonte Cristo, who could not help looking at Morrel with somuch intensity, that two or three times the young man hadbeen unable to sustain that clear and piercing glance.

　　"Why, it seems to me," replied Morrel, "that in deliveringM. de Morcerf, whom you did not know, you did good to yourneighbor and to society."

　　"Of which he is the brightest ornament," said Beauchamp,drinking off a glass of champagne.

　　"My dear count," cried Morcerf, "you are at fault -- you,one of the most formidable logicians I know -- and you mustsee it clearly proved that instead of being an egotist, youare a philanthropist. Ah, you call yourself Oriental, aLevantine, Maltese, Indian, Chinese; your family name isMonte Cristo; Sinbad the Sailor is your baptismalappellation, and yet the first day you set foot in Paris youinstinctively display the greatest virtue, or rather thechief defect, of us eccentric Parisians, -- that is, youassume the vices you have not, and conceal the virtues youpossess."

　　"My dear vicomte," returned Monte Cristo, "I do not see, inall I have done, anything that merits, either from you orthese gentlemen, the pretended eulogies I have received. Youwere no stranger to me, for I knew you from the time I gaveup two rooms to you, invited you to breakfast with me, lentyou one of my carriages, witnessed the Carnival in yourcompany, and saw with you from a window in the Piazza delPopolo the execution that affected you so much that younearly fainted. I will appeal to any of these gentlemen,could I leave my guest in the hands of a hideous bandit, asyou term him? Besides, you know, I had the idea that youcould introduce me into some of the Paris salons when I cameto France. You might some time ago have looked upon thisresolution as a vague project, but to-day you see it was areality, and you must submit to it under penalty of breakingyour word."

　　"I will keep it," returned Morcerf; "but I fear that youwill be much disappointed, accustomed as you are topicturesque events and fantastic horizons. Amongst us youwill not meet with any of those episodes with which youradventurous existence has so familiarized you; ourChimborazo is Mortmartre, our Himalaya is Mount Valerien,our Great Desert is the plain of Grenelle, where they arenow boring an artesian well to water the caravans. We haveplenty of thieves, though not so many as is said; but thesethieves stand in far more dread of a policeman than a lord.France is so prosaic, and Paris so civilized a city, thatyou will not find in its eighty-five departments -- I sayeighty-five, because I do not include Corsica -- you willnot find, then, in these eighty-five departments a singlehill on which there is not a telegraph, or a grotto in whichthe commissary of police has not put up a gaslamp. There isbut one service I can render you, and for that I placemyself entirely at your orders, that is, to present, or makemy friends present, you everywhere; besides, you have noneed of any one to introduce you -- with your name, and yourfortune, and your talent" (Monte Cristo bowed with asomewhat ironical smile) "you can present yourselfeverywhere, and be well received. I can be useful in one wayonly -- if knowledge of Parisian habits, of the means ofrendering yourself comfortable, or of the bazaars, canassist, you may depend upon me to find you a fittingdwelling here. I do not dare offer to share my apartmentswith you, as I shared yours at Rome -- I, who do not professegotism, but am yet egotist par excellence; for, exceptmyself, these rooms would not hold a shadow more, unlessthat shadow were feminine."

　　"Ah," said the count, "that is a most conjugal reservation;I recollect that at Rome you said something of a projectedmarriage. May I congratulate you?"

　　"The affair is still in projection."

　　"And he who says in `projection,' means already decided,"said Debray.

　　"No," replied Morcerf, "my father is most anxious about it;and I hope, ere long, to introduce you, if not to my wife,at least to my betrothed -- Mademoiselle Eugenie Danglars."

　　"Eugenie Danglars," said Monte Cristo; "tell me, is not herfather Baron Danglars?"

　　"Yes," returned Morcerf, "a baron of a new creation."

　　"What matter," said Monte Cristo "if he has rendered theState services which merit this distinction?"

　　"Enormous ones," answered Beauchamp. "Although in reality aLiberal, he negotiated a loan of six millions for CharlesX., in 1829, who made him a baron and chevalier of theLegion of Honor; so that he wears the ribbon, not, as youwould think, in his waistcoat-pocket, but at hisbutton-hole."

　　"Ah," interrupted Morcerf, laughing, "Beauchamp, Beauchamp,keep that for the Corsaire or the Charivari, but spare myfuture father-in-law before me." Then, turning to MonteCristo, "You just now spoke his name as if you knew thebaron?"

　　"I do not know him," returned Monte Cristo; "but I shallprobably soon make his acquaintance, for I have a creditopened with him by the house of Richard & Blount, of London,Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, and Thomson & French at Rome."As he pronounced the two last names, the count glanced atMaximilian Morrel. If the stranger expected to produce aneffect on Morrel, he was not mistaken -- Maximilian startedas if he had been electrified. "Thomson & French," said he;"do you know this house, monsieur?"

　　"They are my bankers in the capital of the Christian world,"returned the count quietly. "Can my influence with them beof any service to you?"

　　"Oh, count, you could assist me perhaps in researches whichhave been, up to the present, fruitless. This house, in pastyears, did ours a great service, and has, I know not forwhat reason, always denied having rendered us this service."

　　"I shall be at your orders," said Monte Cristo bowing.

　　"But," continued Morcerf, "a propos of Danglars, -- we havestrangely wandered from the subject. We were speaking of asuitable habitation for the Count of Monte Cristo. Come,gentlemen, let us all propose some place. Where shall welodge this new guest in our great capital?"

　　"Faubourg Saint-Germain," said Chateau-Renaud. "The countwill find there a charming hotel, with a court and garden."

　　"Bah, Chateau-Renaud," returned Debray, "you only know yourdull and gloomy Faubourg Saint-Germain; do not pay anyattention to him, count -- live in the Chaussee d'Antin,that's the real centre of Paris."

　　"Boulevard de l'Opera," said Beauchamp; "the second floor --a house with a balcony. The count will have his cushions ofsilver cloth brought there, and as he smokes his chibouque,see all Paris pass before him."

　　"You have no idea, then, Morrel?" asked Chateau-Renaud; "youdo not propose anything."

　　"Oh, yes," returned the young man, smiling; "on thecontrary, I have one, but I expected the count would betempted by one of the brilliant proposals made him, yet ashe has not replied to any of them, I will venture to offerhim a suite of apartments in a charming hotel, in thePompadour style, that my sister has inhabited for a year, inthe Rue Meslay."

　　"You have a sister?" asked the count.

　　"Yes, monsieur, a most excellent sister."

　　"Married?"

　　"Nearly nine years."

　　"Happy?" asked the count again.

　　"As happy as it is permitted to a human creature to be,"replied Maximilian. "She married the man she loved, whoremained faithful to us in our fallen fortunes -- EmmanuelHerbaut." Monte Cristo smiled imperceptibly. "I live thereduring my leave of absence," continued Maximilian; "and Ishall be, together with my brother-in-law Emmanuel, at thedisposition of the Count, whenever he thinks fit to honorus."

　　"One minute," cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo thetime to reply. "Take care, you are going to immure atraveller, Sinbad the Sailor, a man who comes to see Paris;you are going to make a patriarch of him."

　　"Oh, no," said Morrel; "my sister is five and twenty, mybrother-in-law is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy.Besides, the count will be in his own house, and only seethem when he thinks fit to do so."

　　"Thanks, monsieur," said Monte Cristo; "I shall contentmyself with being presented to your sister and her husband,if you will do me the honor to introduce me; but I cannotaccept the offer of any one of these gentlemen, since myhabitation is already prepared."

　　"What," cried Morcerf; "you are, then, going to an hotel --that will be very dull for you."

　　"Was I so badly lodged at Rome?" said Monte Cristo smiling.

　　"Parbleu, at Rome you spent fifty thousand piastres infurnishing your apartments, but I presume that you are notdisposed to spend a similar sum every day."

　　"It is not that which deterred me," replied Monte Cristo;"but as I determined to have a house to myself, I sent on myvalet de chambre, and he ought by this time to have boughtthe house and furnished it."

　　"But you have, then, a valet de chambre who knows Paris?"said Beauchamp.

　　"It is the first time he has ever been in Paris. He isblack, and cannot speak," returned Monte Cristo.

　　"It is Ali!" cried Albert, in the midst of the generalsurprise.

　　"Yes, Ali himself, my Nubian mute, whom you saw, I think, atRome."

　　"Certainly," said Morcerf; "I recollect him perfectly. Buthow could you charge a Nubian to purchase a house, and amute to furnish it? -- he will do everything wrong."

　　"Undeceive yourself, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo; "I amquite sure, that, on the contrary, he will choose everythingas I wish. He knows my tastes, my caprices, my wants. He hasbeen here a week, with the instinct of a hound, hunting byhimself. He will arrange everything for me. He knew, that Ishould arrive to-day at ten o'clock; he was waiting for meat nine at the Barriere de Fontainebleau. He gave me thispaper; it contains the number of my new abode; read ityourself," and Monte Cristo passed a paper to Albert. "Ah,that is really original," said Beauchamp.

　　"And very princely," added Chateau-Renaud.

　　"What, do you not know your house?" asked Debray.

　　"No," said Monte Cristo; "I told you I did not wish to bebehind my time; I dressed myself in the carriage, anddescended at the viscount's door." The young men looked ateach other; they did not know if it was a comedy MonteCristo was playing, but every word he uttered had such anair of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what hesaid was false -- besides, why should he tell a falsehood?"We must content ourselves, then," said Beauchamp, "withrendering the count all the little services in our power. I,in my quality of journalist, open all the theatres to him."

　　"Thanks, monsieur," returned Monte Cristo, "my steward hasorders to take a box at each theatre."

　　"Is your steward also a Nubian?" asked Debray.

　　"No, he is a countryman of yours, if a Corsican is acountryman of any one's. But you know him, M. de Morcerf."

　　"Is it that excellent M. Bertuccio, who understands hiringwindows so well?"

　　"Yes, you saw him the day I had the honor of receiving you;he has been a soldier, a smuggler -- in fact, everything. Iwould not be quite sure that he has not been mixed up withthe police for some trifle -- a stab with a knife, forinstance."

　　"And you have chosen this honest citizen for your steward,"said Debray. "Of how much does he rob you every year?"

　　"On my word," replied the count, "not more than another. Iam sure he answers my purpose, knows no impossibility, andso I keep him."

　　"Then," continued Chateau-Renaud, "since you have anestablishment, a steward, and a hotel in the Champs Elysees,you only want a mistress." Albert smiled. He thought of thefair Greek he had seen in the count's box at the Argentinaand Valle theatres. "I have something better than that,"said Monte Cristo; "I have a slave. You procure yourmistresses from the opera, the Vaudeville, or the Varietes;I purchased mine at Constantinople; it cost me more, but Ihave nothing to fear."

　　"But you forget," replied Debray, laughing, "that we areFranks by name and franks by nature, as King Charles said,and that the moment she puts her foot in France your slavebecomes free."

　　"Who will tell her?"

　　"The first person who sees her."

　　"She only speaks Romaic."

　　"That is different."

　　"But at least we shall see her," said Beauchamp, "or do youkeep eunuchs as well as mutes?"

　　"Oh, no," replied Monte Cristo; "I do not carry brutalism sofar. Every one who surrounds me is free to quit me, and whenthey leave me will no longer have any need of me or any oneelse; it is for that reason, perhaps, that they do not quitme." They had long since passed to dessert and cigars.

　　"My dear Albert," said Debray, rising, "it is half-past two.Your guest is charming, but you leave the best company to gointo the worst sometimes. I must return to the minister's. Iwill tell him of the count, and we shall soon know who heis."

　　"Take care," returned Albert; "no one has been able toaccomplish that."

　　"Oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true theyare almost always spent beforehand, but, no matter, we shallstill have fifty thousand francs to spend for this purpose."

　　"And when you know, will you tell me?"

　　"I promise you. Au revoir, Albert. Gentlemen, good morning."

　　As he left the room, Debray called out loudly, "Mycarriage."

　　"Bravo," said Beauchamp to Albert; "I shall not go to theChamber, but I have something better to offer my readersthan a speech of M. Danglars."

　　"For heaven's sake, Beauchamp," returned Morcerf, "do notdeprive me of the merit of introducing him everywhere. Is henot peculiar?"

　　"He is more than that," replied Chateau-Renaud; "he is oneof the most extraordinary men I ever saw in my life. Are youcoming, Morrel?"

　　"Directly I have given my card to the count, who haspromised to pay us a visit at Rue Meslay, No. 14."

　　"Be sure I shall not fail to do so," returned the count,bowing. And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baronde Chateau-Renaud, leaving Monte Cristo alone with Morcerf.

　　Chapter 41The Presentation.

　　When Albert found himself alone with Monte Cristo, "My dearcount," said he, "allow me to commence my services ascicerone by showing you a specimen of a bachelor'sapartment. You, who are accustomed to the palaces of Italy,can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square feet ayoung man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live. Aswe pass from one room to another, I will open the windows tolet you breathe." Monte Cristo had already seen thebreakfast-room and the salon on the ground-floor. Albert ledhim first to his atelier, which was, as we have said, hisfavorite apartment. Monte Cristo quickly appreciated allthat Albert had collected here -- old cabinets, Japaneseporcelain, Oriental stuffs, Venetian glass, arms from allparts of the world -- everything was familiar to him; and atthe first glance he recognized their date, their country,and their origin. Morcerf had expected he should be theguide; on the contrary, it was he who, under the count'sguidance, followed a course of archaeology, mineralogy, andnatural history. They descended to the first floor; Albertled his guest into the salon. The salon was filled with theworks of modern artists; there were landscapes by Dupre,with their long reeds and tall trees, their lowing oxen andmarvellous skies; Delacroix's Arabian cavaliers, with theirlong white burnouses, their shining belts, their damaskedarms, their horses, who tore each other with their teethwhile their riders contended fiercely with their maces;aquarelles of Boulanger, representing Notre Dame de Pariswith that vigor that makes the artist the rival of the poet;there were paintings by Diaz, who makes his flowers morebeautiful than flowers, his suns more brilliant than thesun; designs by Decamp, as vividly colored as those ofSalvator Rosa, but more poetic; pastels by Giraud andMuller, representing children like angels and women with thefeatures of a virgin; sketches torn from the album ofDauzats' "Travels in the East," that had been made in a fewseconds on the saddle of a camel, or beneath the dome of amosque -- in a word, all that modern art can give inexchange and as recompense for the art lost and gone withages long since past.

　　Albert expected to have something new this time to show tothe traveller, but, to his great surprise, the latter,without seeking for the signatures, many of which, indeed,were only initials, named instantly the author of everypicture in such a manner that it was easy to see that eachname was not only known to him, but that each styleassociated with it had been appreciated and studied by him.From the salon they passed into the bed-chamber; it was amodel of taste and simple elegance. A single portrait,signed by Leopold Robert, shone in its carved and gildedframe. This portrait attracted the Count of Monte Cristo'sattention, for he made three rapid steps in the chamber, andstopped suddenly before it. It was the portrait of a youngwoman of five or six and twenty, with a dark complexion, andlight and lustrous eyes, veiled beneath long lashes. Shewore the picturesque costume of the Catalan fisherwomen, ared and black bodice, and golden pins in her hair. She waslooking at the sea, and her form was outlined on the blueocean and sky. The light was so faint in the room thatAlbert did not perceive the pallor that spread itself overthe count's visage, or the nervous heaving of his chest andshoulders. Silence prevailed for an instant, during whichMonte Cristo gazed intently on the picture.

　　"You have there a most charming mistress, viscount," saidthe count in a perfectly calm tone; "and this costume -- aball costume, doubtless -- becomes her admirably."

　　"Ah, monsieur," returned Albert, "I would never forgive youthis mistake if you had seen another picture beside this.You do not know my mother; she it is whom you see here. Shehad her portrait painted thus six or eight years ago. Thiscostume is a fancy one, it appears, and the resemblance isso great that I think I still see my mother the same as shewas in 1830. The countess had this portrait painted duringthe count's absence. She doubtless intended giving him anagreeable surprise; but, strange to say, this portraitseemed to displease my father, and the value of the picture,which is, as you see, one of the best works of LeopoldRobert, could not overcome his dislike to it. It is true,between ourselves, that M. de Morcerf is one of the mostassiduous peers at the Luxembourg, a general renowned fortheory, but a most mediocre amateur of art. It is differentwith my mother, who paints exceedingly well, and who,unwilling to part with so valuable a picture, gave it to meto put here, where it would be less likely to displease M.de Morcerf, whose portrait, by Gros, I will also show you.Excuse my talking of family matters, but as I shall have thehonor of introducing you to the count, I tell you this toprevent you making any allusions to this picture. Thepicture seems to have a malign influence, for my motherrarely comes here without looking at it, and still morerarely does she look at it without weeping. Thisdisagreement is the only one that has ever taken placebetween the count and countess, who are still as muchunited, although married more than twenty years, as on thefirst day of their wedding."

　　Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek ahidden meaning in his words, but it was evident the youngman uttered them in the simplicity of his heart. "Now," saidAlbert, "that you have seen all my treasures, allow me tooffer them to you, unworthy as they are. Consider yourselfas in your own house, and to put yourself still more at yourease, pray accompany me to the apartments of M. de Morcerf,he whom I wrote from Rome an account of the services yourendered me, and to whom I announced your promised visit,and I may say that both the count and countess anxiouslydesire to thank you in person. You are somewhat blase Iknow, and family scenes have not much effect on Sinbad theSailor, who has seen so many others. However, accept what Ipropose to you as an initiation into Parisian life -- a lifeof politeness, visiting, and introductions." Monte Cristobowed without making any answer; he accepted the offerwithout enthusiasm and without regret, as one of thoseconventions of society which every gentleman looks upon as aduty. Albert summoned his servant, and ordered him toacquaint M. and Madame de Morcerf of the arrival of theCount of Monte Cristo. Albert followed him with the count.When they arrived at the ante-chamber, above the door wasvisible a shield, which, by its rich ornaments and itsharmony with the rest of the furniture, indicated theimportance the owner attached to this blazon. Monte Cristostopped and examined it attentively.

　　"Azure seven merlets, or, placed bender," said he. "Theseare, doubtless, your family arms? Except the knowledge ofblazons, that enables me to decipher them, I am veryignorant of heraldry -- I, a count of a fresh creation,fabricated in Tuscany by the aid of a commandery of St.Stephen, and who would not have taken the trouble had I notbeen told that when you travel much it is necessary.Besides, you must have something on the panels of yourcarriage, to escape being searched by the custom-houseofficers. Excuse my putting such a question to you."

　　"It is not indiscreet," returned Morcerf, with thesimplicity of conviction. "You have guessed rightly. Theseare our arms, that is, those of my father, but they are, asyou see, joined to another shield, which has gules, a silvertower, which are my mother's. By her side I am Spanish, butthe family of Morcerf is French, and, I have heard, one ofthe oldest of the south of France."

　　"Yes," replied Monte Cristo "these blazons prove that.Almost all the armed pilgrims that went to the Holy Landtook for their arms either a cross, in honor of theirmission, or birds of passage, in sign of the long voyagethey were about to undertake, and which they hoped toaccomplish on the wings of faith. One of your ancestors hadjoined the Crusades, and supposing it to be only that of St.Louis, that makes you mount to the thirteenth century, whichis tolerably ancient."

　　"It is possible," said Morcerf; "my father has in his studya genealogical tree which will tell you all that, and onwhich I made commentaries that would have greatly edifiedHozier and Jaucourt. At present I no longer think of it, andyet I must tell you that we are beginning to occupyourselves greatly with these things under our populargovernment."

　　"Well, then, your government would do well to choose fromthe past something better than the things that I havenoticed on your monuments, and which have no heraldicmeaning whatever. As for you, viscount," continued MonteCristo to Morcerf, "you are more fortunate than thegovernment, for your arms are really beautiful, and speak tothe imagination. Yes, you are at once from Provence andSpain; that explains, if the portrait you showed me be like,the dark hue I so much admired on the visage of the nobleCatalan." It would have required the penetration of Oedipusor the Sphinx to have divined the irony the count concealedbeneath these words, apparently uttered with the greatestpoliteness. Morcerf thanked him with a smile, and pushedopen the door above which were his arms, and which, as wehave said, opened into the salon. In the most conspicuouspart of the salon was another portrait. It was that of aman, from five to eight and thirty, in the uniform of ageneral officer, wearing the double epaulet of heavybullion, that indicates superior rank, the ribbon of theLegion of Honor around his neck, which showed he was acommander, and on the right breast, the star of a grandofficer of the order of the Saviour, and on the left that ofthe grand cross of Charles III., which proved that theperson represented by the picture had served in the wars ofGreece and Spain, or, what was just the same thing asregarded decorations, had fulfilled some diplomatic missionin the two countries.

　　Monte Cristo was engaged in examining this portrait with noless care than he had bestowed upon the other, when anotherdoor opened, and he found himself opposite to the Count ofMorcerf in person. He was a man of forty to forty-fiveyears, but he seemed at least fifty, and his black mustacheand eyebrows contrasted strangely with his almost whitehair, which was cut short, in the military fashion. He wasdressed in plain clothes, and wore at his button-hole theribbons of the different orders to which he belonged. Heentered with a tolerably dignified step, and some littlehaste. Monte Cristo saw him advance towards him withoutmaking a single step. It seemed as if his feet were rootedto the ground, and his eyes on the Count of Morcerf."Father," said the young man, "I have the honor ofpresenting to you the Count of Monte Cristo, the generousfriend whom I had the good fortune to meet in the criticalsituation of which I have told you."

　　"You are most welcome, monsieur," said the Count of Morcerf,saluting Monte Cristo with a smile, "and monsieur hasrendered our house, in preserving its only heir, a servicewhich insures him our eternal gratitude." As he said thesewords, the count of Morcerf pointed to a chair, while heseated himself in another opposite the window.

　　Monte Cristo, in taking the seat Morcerf offered him, placedhimself in such a manner as to remain concealed in theshadow of the large velvet curtains, and read on thecareworn and livid features of the count a whole history ofsecret griefs written in each wrinkle time had plantedthere. "The countess," said Morcerf, "was at her toilet whenshe was informed of the visit she was about to receive. Shewill, however, be in the salon in ten minutes."

　　"It is a great honor to me," returned Monte Cristo, "to bethus, on the first day of my arrival in Paris, brought incontact with a man whose merit equals his reputation, and towhom fortune has for once been equitable, but has she notstill on the plains of Metidja, or in the mountains ofAtlas, a marshal's staff to offer you?"

　　"Oh," replied Morcerf, reddening slightly, "I have left theservice, monsieur. Made a peer at the Restoration, I servedthrough the first campaign under the orders of MarshalBourmont. I could, therefore, expect a higher rank, and whoknows what might have happened had the elder branch remainedon the throne? But the Revolution of July was, it seems,sufficiently glorious to allow itself to be ungrateful, andit was so for all services that did not date from theimperial period. I tendered my resignation, for when youhave gained your epaulets on the battle-field, you do notknow how to manoeuvre on the slippery grounds of the salons.I have hung up my sword, and cast myself into politics. Ihave devoted myself to industry; I study the useful arts.During the twenty years I served, I often wished to do so,but I had not the time."

　　"These are the ideas that render your nation superior to anyother," returned Monte Cristo. "A gentleman of high birth,possessor of an ample fortune, you have consented to gainyour promotion as an obscure soldier, step by step -- thisis uncommon; then become general, peer of France, commanderof the Legion of Honor, you consent to again commence asecond apprenticeship, without any other hope or any otherdesire than that of one day becoming useful to yourfellow-creatures; this, indeed, is praiseworthy, -- nay,more, it is sublime." Albert looked on and listened withastonishment; he was not used to see Monte Cristo give ventto such bursts of enthusiasm. "Alas," continued thestranger, doubtless to dispel the slight cloud that coveredMorcerf's brow, "we do not act thus in Italy; we growaccording to our race and our species, and we pursue thesame lines, and often the same uselessness, all our lives."

　　"But, monsieur," said the Count of Morcerf, "for a man ofyour merit, Italy is not a country, and France opens herarms to receive you; respond to her call. France will not,perhaps, be always ungrateful. She treats her children ill,but she always welcomes strangers."

　　"Ah, father," said Albert with a smile, "it is evident youdo not know the Count of Monte Cristo; he despises allhonors, and contents himself with those written on hispassport."

　　"That is the most just remark," replied the stranger, "Iever heard made concerning myself."

　　"You have been free to choose your career," observed theCount of Morcerf, with a sigh; "and you have chosen the pathstrewed with flowers."

　　"Precisely, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo with one ofthose smiles that a painter could never represent or aphysiologist analyze.

　　"If I did not fear to fatigue you," said the general,evidently charmed with the count's manners, "I would havetaken you to the Chamber; there is a debate very curious tothose who are strangers to our modern senators."

　　"I shall be most grateful, monsieur, if you will, at somefuture time, renew your offer, but I have been flatteredwith the hope of being introduced to the countess, and Iwill therefore wait."

　　"Ah, here is my mother," cried the viscount. Monte Cristo,turned round hastily, and saw Madame de Morcerf at theentrance of the salon, at the door opposite to that by whichher husband had entered, pale and motionless; when MonteCristo turned round, she let fall her arm, which for someunknown reason had been resting on the gilded door-post. Shehad been there some moments, and had heard the last words ofthe visitor. The latter rose and bowed to the countess, whoinclined herself without speaking. "Ah, good heavens,madame," said the count, "are you ill, or is it the heat ofthe room that affects you?"

　　"Are you ill, mother?" cried the viscount, springing towardsher.

　　She thanked them both with a smile. "No," returned she, "butI feel some emotion on seeing, for the first time, the manwithout whose intervention we should have been in tears anddesolation. Monsieur," continued the countess, advancingwith the majesty of a queen, "I owe to you the life of myson, and for this I bless you. Now, I thank you for thepleasure you give me in thus affording me the opportunity ofthanking you as I have blessed you, from the bottom of myheart." The count bowed again, but lower than before; He waseven paler than Mercedes. "Madame," said he, "the count andyourself recompense too generously a simple action. To savea man, to spare a father's feelings, or a mother'ssensibility, is not to do a good action, but a simple deedof humanity." At these words, uttered with the mostexquisite sweetness and politeness, Madame de Morcerfreplied. "It is very fortunate for my son, monsieur, that hefound such a friend, and I thank God that things are thus."And Mercedes raised her fine eyes to heaven with so ferventan expression of gratitude, that the count fancied he sawtears in them. M. de Morcerf approached her. "Madame," saidhe. "I have already made my excuses to the count forquitting him, and I pray you to do so also. The sittingcommences at two; it is now three, and I am to speak."

　　"Go, then, and monsieur and I will strive our best to forgetyour absence," replied the countess, with the same tone ofdeep feeling. "Monsieur," continued she, turning to MonteCristo, "will you do us the honor of passing the rest of theday with us?"

　　"Believe me, madame, I feel most grateful for your kindness,but I got out of my travelling carriage at your door thismorning, and I am ignorant how I am installed in Paris,which I scarcely know; this is but a trifling inquietude, Iknow, but one that may be appreciated."

　　"We shall have the pleasure another time," said thecountess; "you promise that?" Monte Cristo inclined himselfwithout answering, but the gesture might pass for assent. "Iwill not detain you, monsieur," continued the countess; "Iwould not have our gratitude become indiscreet orimportunate."

　　"My dear Count," said Albert, "I will endeavor to returnyour politeness at Rome, and place my coupe at your disposaluntil your own be ready."

　　"A thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount," returnedthe Count of Monte Cristo "but I suppose that M. Bertucciohas suitably employed the four hours and a half I have givenhim, and that I shall find a carriage of some sort ready atthe door." Albert was used to the count's manner ofproceeding; he knew that, like Nero, he was in search of theimpossible, and nothing astonished him, but wishing to judgewith his own eyes how far the count's orders had beenexecuted, he accompanied him to the door of the house. MonteCristo was not deceived. As soon as he appeared in the Countof Morcerf's ante-chamber, a footman, the same who at Romehad brought the count's card to the two young men, andannounced his visit, sprang into the vestibule, and when hearrived at the door the illustrious traveller found hiscarriage awaiting him. It was a coupe of Koller's building,and with horses and harness for which Drake had, to theknowledge of all the lions of Paris, refused on the previousday seven hundred guineas. "Monsieur," said the count toAlbert, "I do not ask you to accompany me to my house, as Ican only show you a habitation fitted up in a hurry, and Ihave, as you know, a reputation to keep up as regards notbeing taken by surprise. Give me, therefore, one more daybefore I invite you; I shall then be certain not to fail inmy hospitality."

　　"If you ask me for a day, count, I know what to anticipate;it will not be a house I shall see, but a palace. You havedecidedly some genius at your control."

　　"Ma foi, spread that idea," replied the Count of MonteCristo, putting his foot on the velvet-lined steps of hissplendid carriage, "and that will be worth something to meamong the ladies." As he spoke, he sprang into the vehicle,the door was closed, but not so rapidly that Monte Cristofailed to perceive the almost imperceptible movement whichstirred the curtains of the apartment in which he had leftMadame de Morcerf. When Albert returned to his mother, hefound her in the boudoir reclining in a large velvetarm-chair, the whole room so obscure that only the shiningspangle, fastened here and there to the drapery, and theangles of the gilded frames of the pictures, showed withsome degree of brightness in the gloom. Albert could not seethe face of the countess, as it was covered with a thin veilshe had put on her head, and which fell over her features inmisty folds, but it seemed to him as though her voice hadaltered. He could distinguish amid the perfumes of the rosesand heliotropes in the flower-stands, the sharp and fragrantodor of volatile salts, and he noticed in one of the chasedcups on the mantle-piece the countess's smelling-bottle,taken from its shagreen case, and exclaimed in a tone ofuneasiness, as he entered, -- "My dear mother, have you beenill during my absence?"

　　"No, no, Albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, andorange-flowers throw out at first, before one is used tothem, such violent perfumes."

　　"Then, my dear mother," said Albert, putting his hand to thebell, "they must be taken into the ante-chamber. You arereally ill, and just now were so pale as you came into theroom" --

　　"Was I pale, Albert?"

　　"Yes; a pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but whichdid not the less alarm my father and myself."

　　"Did your father speak of it?" inquired Mercedes eagerly.

　　"No, madame; but do you not remember that he spoke of thefact to you?"

　　"Yes, I do remember," replied the countess. A servantentered, summoned by Albert's ring of the bell. "Take theseflowers into the anteroom or dressing-room," said theviscount; "they make the countess ill." The footman obeyedhis orders. A long pause ensued, which lasted until all theflowers were removed. "What is this name of Monte Cristo?"inquired the countess, when the servant had taken away thelast vase of flowers, "is it a family name, or the name ofthe estate, or a simple title?"

　　"I believe, mother, it is merely a title. The countpurchased an island in the Tuscan archipelago, and, as hetold you to-day, has founded a commandery. You know the samething was done for Saint Stephen of Florence, Saint George,Constantinian of Parma, and even for the Order of Malta.Except this, he has no pretension to nobility, and callshimself a chance count, although the general opinion at Romeis that the count is a man of very high distinction."

　　"His manners are admirable," said the countess, "at least,as far as I could judge in the few minutes he remainedhere."

　　"They are perfect mother, so perfect, that they surpass byfar all I have known in the leading aristocracy of the threeproudest nobilities of Europe -- the English, the Spanish,and the German." The countess paused a moment; then, after aslight hesitation, she resumed, -- "You have seen, my dearAlbert -- I ask the question as a mother -- you have seen M.de Monte Cristo in his house, you are quicksighted, havemuch knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at yourage, do you think the count is really what he appears tobe?"

　　"What does he appear to be?"

　　"Why, you have just said, -- a man of high distinction."

　　"I told you, my dear mother, he was esteemed such."

　　"But what is your own opinion, Albert?"

　　"I must tell you that I have not come to any decided opinionrespecting him, but I think him a Maltese."

　　"I do not ask you of his origin but what he is."

　　"Ah, what he is; that is quite another thing. I have seen somany remarkable things in him, that if you would have mereally say what I think, I shall reply that I really do lookupon him as one of Byron's heroes, whom misery has markedwith a fatal brand; some Manfred, some Lara, some Werner,one of those wrecks, as it were, of some ancient family,who, disinherited of their patrimony, have achieved one bythe force of their adventurous genius, which has placed themabove the laws of society."

　　"You say" --

　　"I say that Monte Cristo is an island in the midst of theMediterranean, without inhabitants or garrison, the resortof smugglers of all nations, and pirates of every flag. Whoknows whether or not these industrious worthies do not payto their feudal lord some dues for his protection?"

　　"That is possible," said the countess, reflecting.

　　"Never mind," continued the young man, "smuggler or not, youmust agree, mother dear, as you have seen him, that theCount of Monte Cristo is a remarkable man, who will have thegreatest success in the salons of Paris. Why, this verymorning, in my rooms, he made his entree amongst us bystriking every man of us with amazement, not even exceptingChateau-Renaud."

　　"And what do you suppose is the count's age?" inquiredMercedes, evidently attaching great importance to thisquestion.

　　"Thirty-five or thirty-six, mother."

　　"So young, -- it is impossible," said Mercedes, replying atthe same time to what Albert said as well as to her ownprivate reflection.

　　"It is the truth, however. Three or four times he has saidto me, and certainly without the slightest premeditation,`at such a period I was five years old, at another ten yearsold, at another twelve,' and I, induced by curiosity, whichkept me alive to these details, have compared the dates, andnever found him inaccurate. The age of this singular man,who is of no age, is then, I am certain, thirty-five.Besides, mother, remark how vivid his eye, how raven-blackhis hair, and his brow, though so pale, is free fromwrinkles, -- he is not only vigorous, but also young." Thecountess bent her head, as if beneath a heavy wave of bitterthoughts. "And has this man displayed a friendship for you,Albert?" she asked with a nervous shudder.

　　"I am inclined to think so."

　　"And -- do -- you -- like -- him?"

　　"Why, he pleases me in spite of Franz d'Epinay, who tries toconvince me that he is a being returned from the otherworld." The countess shuddered. "Albert," she said, in avoice which was altered by emotion, "I have always put youon your guard against new acquaintances. Now you are a man,and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you, Albert,be prudent."

　　"Why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make youradvice turn to account, that I should know beforehand what Ihave to distrust. The count never plays, he only drinks purewater tinged with a little sherry, and is so rich that hecannot, without intending to laugh at me, try to borrowmoney. What, then, have I to fear from him?"

　　"You are right," said the countess, "and my fears areweakness, especially when directed against a man who hassaved your life. How did your father receive him, Albert? Itis necessary that we should be more than complaisant to thecount. M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, his businessmakes him reflective, and he might, without intending it" --

　　"Nothing could be in better taste than my father's demeanor,madame," said Albert; "nay, more, he seemed greatlyflattered at two or three compliments which the count veryskilfully and agreeably paid him with as much ease as if hehad known him these thirty years. Each of these littletickling arrows must have pleased my father," added Albertwith a laugh. "And thus they parted the best possiblefriends, and M. de Morcerf even wished to take him to theChamber to hear the speakers." The countess made no reply.She fell into so deep a revery that her eyes graduallyclosed. The young man, standing up before her, gazed uponher with that filial affection which is so tender andendearing with children whose mothers are still young andhandsome. Then, after seeing her eyes closed, and hearingher breathe gently, he believed she had dropped asleep, andleft the apartment on tiptoe, closing the door after himwith the utmost precaution. "This devil of a fellow," hemuttered, shaking his head; "I said at the time he wouldcreate a sensation here, and I measure his effect by aninfallible thermometer. My mother has noticed him, and hemust therefore, perforce, be remarkable." He went down tothe stables, not without some slight annoyance, when heremembered that the Count of Monte Cristo had laid his handson a "turnout" which sent his bays down to second place inthe opinion of connoisseurs. "Most decidedly," said he, "menare not equal, and I must beg my father to develop thistheorem in the Chamber of Peers."

　　Chapter 42Monsieur Bertuccio.

　　Meanwhile the count had arrived at his house; it had takenhim six minutes to perform the distance, but these sixminutes were sufficient to induce twenty young men who knewthe price of the equipage they had been unable to purchasethemselves, to put their horses in a gallop in order to seethe rich foreigner who could afford to give 20,000 francsapiece for his horses. The house Ali had chosen, and whichwas to serve as a town residence to Monte Cristo, wassituated on the right hand as you ascend the Champs Elysees.A thick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre, andmasked a portion of the front; around this shrubbery twoalleys, like two arms, extended right and left, and formed acarriage-drive from the iron gates to a double portico, onevery step of which stood a porcelain vase. filled withflowers. This house, isolated from the rest, had, besidesthe main entrance, another in the Rue Ponthieu. Even beforethe coachman had hailed the concierge, the massy gatesrolled on their hinges -- they had seen the Count coming,and at Paris, as everywhere else, he was served with therapidity of lightning. The coachman entered and traversedthe half-circle without slackening his speed, and the gateswere closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on thegravel. The carriage stopped at the left side of theportico, two men presented themselves at thecarriage-window; the one was Ali, who, smiling with anexpression of the most sincere joy, seemed amply repaid by amere look from Monte Cristo. The other bowed respectfully,and offered his arm to assist the count in descending."Thanks, M. Bertuccio," said the count, springing lightly upthe three steps of the portico; "and the notary?"

　　"He is in the small salon, excellency," returned Bertuccio.

　　"And the cards I ordered to be engraved as soon as you knewthe number of the house?"

　　"Your excellency, it is done already. I have been myself tothe best engraver of the Palais Royal, who did the plate inmy presence. The first card struck off was taken, accordingto your orders, to the Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chausseed'Antin, No. 7; the others are on the mantle-piece of yourexcellency's bedroom."

　　"Good; what o'clock is it?"

　　"Four o'clock." Monte Cristo gave his hat, cane, and glovesto the same French footman who had called his carriage atthe Count of Morcerf's, and then he passed into the smallsalon, preceded by Bertuccio, who showed him the way. "Theseare but indifferent marbles in this ante-chamber," saidMonte Cristo. "I trust all this will soon be taken away."Bertuccio bowed. As the steward had said, the notary awaitedhim in the small salon. He was a simple-looking lawyer'sclerk, elevated to the extraordinary dignity of a provincialscrivener. "You are the notary empowered to sell the countryhouse that I wish to purchase, monsieur?" asked MonteCristo.

　　"Yes, count," returned the notary.

　　"Is the deed of sale ready?"

　　"Yes, count."

　　"Have you brought it?"

　　"Here it is."

　　"Very well; and where is this house that I purchase?" askedthe count carelessly, addressing himself half to Bertuccio,half to the notary. The steward made a gesture thatsignified, "I do not know." The notary looked at the countwith astonishment. "What!" said he, "does not the count knowwhere the house he purchases is situated?"

　　"No," returned the count.

　　"The count does not know?"

　　"How should I know? I have arrived from Cadiz this morning.I have never before been at Paris, and it is the first timeI have ever even set my foot in France."

　　"Ah, that is different; the house you purchase is atAuteuil." At these words Bertuccio turned pale. "And whereis Auteuil?" asked the count.

　　"Close by here, monsieur," replied the notary -- "a littlebeyond Passy; a charming situation, in the heart of the Boisde Boulogne."

　　"So near as that?" said the Count; "but that is not in thecountry. What made you choose a house at the gates of Paris,M. Bertuccio?"

　　"I," cried the steward with a strange expression. "Hisexcellency did not charge me to purchase this house. If hisexcellency will recollect -- if he will think" --

　　"Ah, true," observed Monte Cristo; "I recollect now. I readthe advertisement in one of the papers, and was tempted bythe false title, `a country house.'"

　　"It is not yet too late," cried Bertuccio, eagerly; "and ifyour excellency will intrust me with the commission, I willfind you a better at Enghien, at Fontenay-aux-Roses, or atBellevue."

　　"Oh, no," returned Monte Cristo negligently; "since I havethis, I will keep it."

　　"And you are quite right," said the notary, who feared tolose his fee. "It is a charming place, well supplied withspring-water and fine trees; a comfortable habitation,although abandoned for a long time, without reckoning thefurniture, which, although old, is yet valuable, now thatold things are so much sought after. I suppose the count hasthe tastes of the day?"

　　"To be sure," returned Monte Cristo; "it is very convenient,then?"

　　"It is more -- it is magnificent."

　　"Peste, let us not lose such an opportunity," returned MonteCristo. "The deed, if you please, Mr. Notary." And he signedit rapidly, after having first run his eye over that part ofthe deed in which were specified the situation of the houseand the names of the proprietors. "Bertuccio," said he,"give fifty-five thousand francs to monsieur." The stewardleft the room with a faltering step, and returned with abundle of bank-notes, which the notary counted like a manwho never gives a receipt for money until after he is sureit is all there. "And now," demanded the count, "are all theforms complied with?"

　　"All, sir."

　　"Have you the keys?"

　　"They are in the hands of the concierge, who takes care ofthe house, but here is the order I have given him to installthe count in his new possessions."

　　"Very well;" and Monte Cristo made a sign with his hand tothe notary, which said, "I have no further need of you; youmay go."

　　"But," observed the honest notary, "the count is, I think,mistaken; it is only fifty thousand francs, everythingincluded."

　　"And your fee?"

　　"Is included in this sum."

　　"But have you not come from Auteuil here?"

　　"Yes, certainly."

　　"Well, then, it is but fair that you should be paid for yourloss of time and trouble," said the count; and he made agesture of polite dismissal. The notary left the roombackwards, and bowing down to the ground; it was the firsttime he had ever met a similar client. "See this gentlemanout," said the count to Bertuccio. And the steward followedthe notary out of the room. Scarcely was the count alone,when he drew from his pocket a book closed with a lock, andopened it with a key which he wore round his neck, and whichnever left him. After having sought for a few minutes, hestopped at a leaf which had several notes, and compared themwith the deed of sale, which lay on the table. "`Auteuil,Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28;' it is indeed the same," saidhe; "and now, am I to rely upon an avowal extorted byreligious or physical terror? However, in an hour I shallknow all. Bertuccio!" cried he, striking a light hammer witha pliant handle on a small gong. "Bertuccio!" The stewardappeared at the door. "Monsieur Bertuccio," said the count,"did you never tell me that you had travelled in France?"

　　"In some parts of France -- yes, excellency."

　　"You know the environs of Paris, then?"

　　"No, excellency, no," returned the steward, with a sort ofnervous trembling, which Monte Cristo, a connoisseur in allemotions, rightly attributed to great disquietude.

　　"It is unfortunate," returned he, "that you have nevervisited the environs, for I wish to see my new property thisevening, and had you gone with me, you could have given mesome useful information."

　　"To Auteuil!" cried Bertuccio, whose copper complexionbecame livid -- "I go to Auteuil?"

　　"Well, what is there surprising in that? When I live atAuteuil, you must come there, as you belong to my service."Bertuccio hung down his head before the imperious look ofhis master, and remained motionless, without making anyanswer. "Why, what has happened to you? -- are you going tomake me ring a second time for the carriage?" asked MonteCristo, in the same tone that Louis XIV. pronounced thefamous, "I have been almost obliged to wait." Bertuccio madebut one bound to the ante-chamber, and cried in a hoarsevoice -- "His excellency's horses!" Monte Cristo wrote twoor three notes, and, as he sealed the last, the stewardappeared. "Your excellency's carriage is at the door," saidhe.

　　"Well, take your hat and gloves," returned Monte Cristo.

　　"Am I to accompany you, your excellency?" cried Bertuccio.

　　"Certainly, you must give the orders, for I intend residingat the house." It was unexampled for a servant of thecount's to dare to dispute an order of his, so the steward,without saying a word, followed his master, who got into thecarriage, and signed to him to follow, which he did, takinghis place respectfully on the front seat.

　　Chapter 43The House at Auteuil.

　　Monte Cristo noticed, as they descended the staircase, thatBertuccio signed himself in the Corsican manner; that is,had formed the sign of the cross in the air with his thumb,and as he seated himself in the carriage, muttered a shortprayer. Any one but a man of exhaustless thirst forknowledge would have had pity on seeing the steward'sextraordinary repugnance for the count's projected drivewithout the walls; but the Count was too curious to letBertuccio off from this little journey. In twenty minutesthey were at Auteuil; the steward's emotion had continued toaugment as they entered the village. Bertuccio, crouched inthe corner of the carriage, began to examine with a feverishanxiety every house they passed. "Tell them to stop at Ruede la Fontaine, No. 28," said the count, fixing his eyes onthe steward, to whom he gave this order. Bertuccio'sforehead was covered with perspiration; however, he obeyed,and, leaning out of the window, he cried to the coachman, --"Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28." No. 28 was situated at theextremity of the village; during the drive night had set in,and darkness gave the surroundings the artificial appearanceof a scene on the stage. The carriage stopped, the footmansprang off the box, and opened the door. "Well," said thecount, "you do not get out, M. Bertuccio -- you are going tostay in the carriage, then? What are you thinking of thisevening?" Bertuccio sprang out, and offered his shoulder tothe count, who, this time, leaned upon it as he descendedthe three steps of the carriage. "Knock," said the count,"and announce me." Bertuccio knocked, the door opened, andthe concierge appeared. "What is it?" asked he.

　　"It is your new master, my good fellow," said the footman.And he held out to the concierge the notary's order.

　　"The house is sold, then?" demanded the concierge; "and thisgentleman is coming to live here?"

　　"Yes, my friend," returned the count; "and I will endeavorto give you no cause to regret your old master."

　　"Oh, monsieur," said the concierge, "I shall not have muchcause to regret him, for he came here but seldom; it is fiveyears since he was here last, and he did well to sell thehouse, for it did not bring him in anything at all."

　　"What was the name of your old master?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"The Marquis of Saint-Meran. Ah, I am sure he has not soldthe house for what he gave for it."

　　"The Marquis of Saint-Meran!" returned the count. "The nameis not unknown to me; the Marquis of Saint-Meran!" and heappeared to meditate.

　　"An old gentleman," continued the concierge, "a stanchfollower of the Bourbons; he had an only daughter, whomarried M. de Villefort, who had been the king's attorney atNimes, and afterwards at Versailles." Monte Cristo glancedat Bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall against whichhe leaned to prevent himself from falling. "And is not thisdaughter dead?" demanded Monte Cristo; "I fancy I have heardso."

　　"Yes, monsieur, one and twenty years ago; and since then wehave not seen the poor marquis three times."

　　"Thanks, thanks," said Monte Cristo, judging from thesteward's utter prostration that he could not stretch thecord further without danger of breaking it. "Give me alight."

　　"Shall I accompany you, monsieur?"

　　"No, it is unnecessary; Bertuccio will show me a light." AndMonte Cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two goldpieces, which produced a torrent of thanks and blessingsfrom the concierge. "Ah, monsieur," said he, after havingvainly searched on the mantle-piece and the shelves, "I havenot got any candles."

　　"Take one of the carriage-lamps, Bertuccio," said the count,"and show me the apartments." The steward obeyed in silence,but it was easy to see, from the manner in which the handthat held the light trembled, how much it cost him to obey.They went over a tolerably large ground-floor; a secondfloor consisted of a salon, a bathroom, and two bedrooms;near one of the bedrooms they came to a winding staircasethat led down to the garden.

　　"Ah, here is a private staircase," said the count; "that isconvenient. Light me, M. Bertuccio, and go first; we willsee where it leads to."

　　"Monsieur," replied Bertuccio, "it leads to the garden."

　　"And, pray, how do you know that?"

　　"It ought to do so, at least."

　　"Well, let us be sure of that." Bertuccio sighed, and wenton first; the stairs did, indeed, lead to the garden. At theouter door the steward paused. "Go on, Monsieur Bertuccio,"said the count. But he who was addressed stood there,stupefied, bewildered, stunned; his haggard eyes glancedaround, as if in search of the traces of some terribleevent, and with his clinched hands he seemed striving toshut out horrible recollections. "Well," insisted the Count."No, no," cried Bertuccio, setting down the lantern at theangle of the interior wall. "No, monsieur, it is impossible;I can go no farther."

　　"What does this mean?" demanded the irresistible voice ofMonte Cristo.

　　"Why, you must see, your excellency," cried the steward,"that this is not natural; that, having a house to purchase,you purchase it exactly at Auteuil, and that, purchasing itat Auteuil, this house should be No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine.Oh, why did I not tell you all? I am sure you would not haveforced me to come. I hoped your house would have been someother one than this; as if there was not another house atAuteuil than that of the assassination!"

　　"What, what!" cried Monte Cristo, stopping suddenly, "whatwords do you utter? Devil of a man, Corsican that you are --always mysteries or superstitions. Come, take the lantern,and let us visit the garden; you are not afraid of ghostswith me, I hope?" Bertuccio raised the lantern, and obeyed.The door, as it opened, disclosed a gloomy sky, in which themoon strove vainly to struggle through a sea of clouds thatcovered her with billows of vapor which she illumined for aninstant, only to sink into obscurity. The steward wished toturn to the left. "No, no, monsieur," said Monte Cristo."What is the use of following the alleys? Here is abeautiful lawn; let us go on straight forwards."

　　Bertuccio wiped the perspiration from his brow, but obeyed;however, he continued to take the left hand. Monte Cristo,on the contrary, took the right hand; arrived near a clumpof trees, he stopped. The steward could not restrainhimself. "Move, monsieur -- move away, I entreat you; youare exactly in the spot!"

　　"What spot?"

　　"Where he fell."

　　"My dear Monsieur Bertuccio," said Monte Cristo, laughing,"control yourself; we are not at Sartena or at Corte. Thisis not a Corsican arbor, but an English garden; badly kept,I own, but still you must not calumniate it for that."

　　"Monsieur, I implore you do not stay there!"

　　"I think you are going mad, Bertuccio," said the countcoldly. "If that is the case, I warn you, I shall have youput in a lunatic asylum."

　　"Alas, excellency," returned Bertuccio, joining his hands,and shaking his head in a manner that would have excited thecount's laughter, had not thoughts of a superior interestoccupied him, and rendered him attentive to the leastrevelation of this timorous conscience. "Alas, excellency,the evil has arrived!"

　　"M. Bertuccio," said the count, "I am very glad to tell you,that while you gesticulate, you wring your hands and rollyour eyes like a man possessed by a devil who will not leavehim; and I have always observed, that the devil mostobstinate to be expelled is a secret. I knew you were aCorsican. I knew you were gloomy, and always brooding oversome old history of the vendetta; and I overlooked that inItaly, because in Italy those things are thought nothing of.But in France they are considered in very bad taste; thereare gendarmes who occupy themselves with such affairs,judges who condemn, and scaffolds which avenge." Bertuccioclasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, he didnot let fall the lantern, the light showed his pale andaltered countenance. Monte Cristo examined him with the samelook that, at Rome, he had bent upon the execution ofAndrea, and then, in a tone that made a shudder pass throughthe veins of the poor steward, -- "The Abbe Busoni, thentold me an untruth," said he, "when, after his journey inFrance, in 1829, he sent you to me, with a letter ofrecommendation, in which he enumerated all your valuablequalities. Well, I shall write to the abbe; I shall hold himresponsible for his protege's misconduct, and I shall soonknow all about this assassination. Only I warn you, thatwhen I reside in a country, I conform to all its code, and Ihave no wish to put myself within the compass of the Frenchlaws for your sake."

　　"Oh, do not do that, excellency; I have always served youfaithfully," cried Bertuccio, in despair. "I have alwaysbeen an honest man, and, as far as lay in my power, I havedone good."

　　"I do not deny it," returned the count; "but why are youthus agitated. It is a bad sign; a quiet conscience does notoccasion such paleness in the cheeks, and such fever in thehands of a man."

　　"But, your excellency," replied Bertuccio hesitatingly, "didnot the Abbe Busoni, who heard my confession in the prisonat Nimes, tell you that I had a heavy burden upon myconscience?"

　　"Yes; but as he said you would make an excellent steward, Iconcluded you had stolen -- that was all."

　　"Oh, your excellency," returned Bertuccio in deep contempt.

　　"Or, as you are a Corsican, that you had been unable toresist the desire of making a `stiff,' as you call it."

　　"Yes, my good master," cried Bertuccio, casting himself atthe count's feet, "it was simply vengeance -- nothing else."

　　"I understand that, but I do not understand what it is thatgalvanizes you in this manner."

　　"But, monsieur, it is very natural," returned Bertuccio,"since it was in this house that my vengeance wasaccomplished."

　　"What! my house?"

　　"Oh, your excellency, it was not yours, then."

　　"Whose, then? The Marquis de Saint-Meran, I think, theconcierge said. What had you to revenge on the Marquis deSaint-Meran?"

　　"Oh, it was not on him, monsieur; it was on another."

　　"This is strange," returned Monte Cristo, seeming to yieldto his reflections, "that you should find yourself withoutany preparation in a house where the event happened thatcauses you so much remorse."

　　"Monsieur," said the steward, "it is fatality, I am sure.First, you purchase a house at Auteuil -- this house is theone where I have committed an assassination; you descend tothe garden by the same staircase by which he descended; youstop at the spot where he received the blow; and two pacesfarther is the grave in which he had just buried his child.This is not chance, for chance, in this case, is too muchlike providence."

　　"Well, amiable Corsican, let us suppose it is providence. Ialways suppose anything people please, and, besides, youmust concede something to diseased minds. Come, collectyourself, and tell me all."

　　"I have related it but once, and that was to the AbbeBusoni. Such things," continued Bertuccio, shaking his head,"are only related under the seal of confession."

　　"Then," said the count, "I refer you to your confessor. TurnChartreux or Trappist, and relate your secrets, but, as forme, I do not like any one who is alarmed by such phantasms,and I do not choose that my servants should be afraid towalk in the garden of an evening. I confess I am not verydesirous of a visit from the commissary of police, for, inItaly, justice is only paid when silent -- in France she ispaid only when she speaks. Peste, I thought you somewhatCorsican, a great deal smuggler, and an excellent steward;but I see you have other strings to your bow. You are nolonger in my service, Monsieur Bertuccio."

　　"Oh, your excellency, your excellency!" cried the steward,struck with terror at this threat, "if that is the onlyreason I cannot remain in your service, I will tell all, forif I quit you, it will only be to go to the scaffold."

　　"That is different," replied Monte Cristo; "but if youintend to tell an untruth, reflect it were better not tospeak at all."

　　"No, monsieur, I swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, Iwill tell you all, for the Abbe Busoni himself only knew apart of my secret; but, I pray you, go away from thatplane-tree. The moon is just bursting through the clouds,and there, standing where you do, and wrapped in that cloakthat conceals your figure, you remind me of M. deVillefort."

　　" What!" cried Monte Cristo, "it was M. de Villefort?"

　　"Your excellency knows him?"

　　"The former royal attorney at Nimes?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Who married the Marquis of Saint-Meran's daughter?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Who enjoyed the reputation of being the most severe, themost upright, the most rigid magistrate on the bench?"

　　"Well, monsieur," said Bertuccio, "this man with thisspotless reputation" --

　　"Well?"

　　"Was a villain."

　　"Bah," replied Monte Cristo, "impossible!"

　　"It is as I tell you."

　　"Ah, really," said Monte Cristo. "Have you proof of this?"

　　"I had it."

　　"And you have lost it; how stupid!"

　　"Yes; but by careful search it might be recovered."

　　"Really," returned the count, "relate it to me, for itbegins to interest me." And the count, humming an air from"Lucia," went to sit down on a bench, while Bertucciofollowed him, collecting his thoughts. Bertuccio remainedstanding before him.

　　Chapter 44The Vendetta.

　　"At what point shall I begin my story, your excellency?"asked Bertuccio.

　　"Where you please," returned Monte Cristo, "since I knownothing at all of it."

　　"I thought the Abbe Busoni had told your excellency."

　　"Some particulars, doubtless, but that is seven or eightyears ago, and I have forgotten them."

　　"Then I can speak without fear of tiring your excellency."

　　"Go on, M. Bertuccio; you will supply the want of theevening papers."

　　"The story begins in 1815."

　　"Ah," said Monte Cristo, "1815 is not yesterday."

　　"No, monsieur, and yet I recollect all things as clearly asif they had happened but then. I had a brother, an elderbrother, who was in the service of the emperor; he hadbecome lieutenant in a regiment composed entirely ofCorsicans. This brother was my only friend; we becameorphans -- I at five, he at eighteen. He brought me up as ifI had been his son, and in 1814 he married. When the emperorreturned from the Island of Elba, my brother instantlyjoined the army, was slightly wounded at Waterloo, andretired with the army beyond the Loire."

　　"But that is the history of the Hundred Days, M. Bertuccio,"said the count; "unless I am mistaken, it has been alreadywritten."

　　"Excuse me, excellency, but these details are necessary, andyou promised to be patient."

　　"Go on; I will keep my word."

　　"One day we received a letter. I should tell you that welived in the little village of Rogliano, at the extremity ofCape Corso. This letter was from my brother. He told us thatthe army was disbanded, and that he should return byChateauroux, Clermont-Ferrand, Le Puy, and Nimes; and, if Ihad any money, he prayed me to leave it for him at Nimes,with an inn-keeper with whom I had dealings."

　　"In the smuggling line?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Eh, your excellency? Every one must live."

　　"Certainly; go on."

　　"I loved my brother tenderly, as I told your excellency, andI resolved not to send the money, but to take it to himmyself. I possessed a thousand francs. I left five hundredwith Assunta, my sister-in-law, and with the other fivehundred I set off for Nimes. It was easy to do so, and as Ihad my boat and a lading to take in at sea, everythingfavored my project. But, after we had taken in our cargo,the wind became contrary, so that we were four or five dayswithout being able to enter the Rhone. At last, however, wesucceeded, and worked up to Arles. I left the boat betweenBellegarde and Beaucaire, and took the road to Nimes."

　　"We are getting to the story now?"

　　"Yes, your excellency; excuse me, but, as you will see, Ionly tell you what is absolutely necessary. Just at thistime the famous massacres took place in the south of France.Three brigands, called Trestaillon, Truphemy, and Graffan,publicly assassinated everybody whom they suspected ofBonapartism. You have doubtless heard of these massacres,your excellency?"

　　"Vaguely; I was far from France at that period. Go on."

　　"As I entered Nimes, I literally waded in blood; at everystep you encountered dead bodies and bands of murderers, whokilled, plundered, and burned. At the sight of thisslaughter and devastation I became terrified, not for myself-- for I, a simple Corsican fisherman, had nothing to fear;on the contrary, that time was most favorable for ussmugglers -- but for my brother, a soldier of the empire,returning from the army of the Loire, with his uniform andhis epaulets, there was everything to apprehend. I hastenedto the inn-keeper. My misgivings had been but too true. Mybrother had arrived the previous evening at Nimes, and, atthe very door of the house where he was about to demandhospitality, he had been assassinated. I did all in my powerto discover the murderers, but no one durst tell me theirnames, so much were they dreaded. I then thought of thatFrench justice of which I had heard so much, and whichfeared nothing, and I went to the king's attorney."

　　"And this king's attorney was named Villefort?" asked MonteCristo carelessly.

　　"Yes, your excellency; he came from Marseilles, where he hadbeen deputy-procureur. His zeal had procured himadvancement, and he was said to be one of the first who hadinformed the government of the departure from the Island ofElba."

　　"Then," said Monte Cristo "you went to him?"

　　"`Monsieur,' I said, `my brother was assassinated yesterdayin the streets of Nimes, I know not by whom, but it is yourduty to find out. You are the representative of justicehere, and it is for justice to avenge those she has beenunable to protect.' -- `Who was your brother?' asked he. --`A lieutenant in the Corsican battalion.' -- `A soldier ofthe usurper, then?' -- `A soldier of the French army.' --`Well,' replied he, `he has smitten with the sword, and hehas perished by the sword.' -- `You are mistaken, monsieur,'I replied; `he has perished by the poniard.' -- `What do youwant me to do?' asked the magistrate. -- `I have alreadytold you -- avenge him.' -- `On whom?' -- `On hismurderers.' -- `How should I know who they are?' -- `Orderthem to be sought for.' -- `Why, your brother has beeninvolved in a quarrel, and killed in a duel. All these oldsoldiers commit excesses which were tolerated in the time ofthe emperor, but which are not suffered now, for the peoplehere do not like soldiers of such disorderly conduct.' --`Monsieur,' I replied, `it is not for myself that I entreatyour interference -- I should grieve for him or avenge him,but my poor brother had a wife, and were anything to happento me, the poor creature would perish from want, for mybrother's pay alone kept her. Pray, try and obtain a smallgovernment pension for her.'

　　"`Every revolution has its catastrophes,' returned M. deVillefort; `your brother has been the victim of this. It isa misfortune, and government owes nothing to his family. Ifwe are to judge by all the vengeance that the followers ofthe usurper exercised on the partisans of the king, when, intheir turn, they were in power, your brother would beto-day, in all probability, condemned to death. What hashappened is quite natural, and in conformity with the law ofreprisals.' -- `What,' cried I, `do you, a magistrate, speakthus to me?' -- `All these Corsicans are mad, on my honor,'replied M. de Villefort; `they fancy that their countrymanis still emperor. You have mistaken the time, you shouldhave told me this two months ago, it is too late now. Gonow, at once, or I shall have you put out.'

　　"I looked at him an instant to see if there was anything tohope from further entreaty. But he was a man of stone. Iapproached him, and said in a low voice, `Well, since youknow the Corsicans so well, you know that they always keeptheir word. You think that it was a good deed to kill mybrother, who was a Bonapartist, because you are a royalist.Well, I, who am a Bonapartist also, declare one thing toyou, which is, that I will kill you. From this moment Ideclare the vendetta against you, so protect yourself aswell as you can, for the next time we meet your last hourhas come.' And before he had recovered from his surprise, Iopened the door and left the room."

　　"Well, well," said Monte Cristo, "such an innocent lookingperson as you are to do those things, M. Bertuccio, and to aking's attorney at that! But did he know what was meant bythe terrible word `vendetta'?"

　　"He knew so well, that from that moment he shut himself inhis house, and never went out unattended, seeking me highand low. Fortunately, I was so well concealed that he couldnot find me. Then he became alarmed, and dared not stay anylonger at Nimes, so he solicited a change of residence, and,as he was in reality very influential, he was nominated toVersailles. But, as you know, a Corsican who has sworn toavenge himself cares not for distance, so his carriage, fastas it went, was never above half a day's journey before me,who followed him on foot. The most important thing was, notto kill him only -- for I had an opportunity of doing so ahundred times -- but to kill him without being discovered --at least, without being arrested. I no longer belonged tomyself, for I had my sister-in-law to protect and providefor. For three months I watched M. de Villefort, for threemonths he took not a step out-of-doors without my followinghim. At length I discovered that he went mysteriously toAuteuil. I followed him thither, and I saw him enter thehouse where we now are, only, instead of entering by thegreat door that looks into the street, he came on horseback,or in his carriage, left the one or the other at the littleinn, and entered by the gate you see there." Monte Cristomade a sign with his head to show that he could discern inthe darkness the door to which Bertuccio alluded. "As I hadnothing more to do at Versailles, I went to Auteuil, andgained all the information I could. If I wished to surprisehim, it was evident this was the spot to lie in wait forhim. The house belonged, as the concierge informed yourexcellency, to M. de Saint-Meran, Villefort's father-in-law.M. de Saint-Meran lived at Marseilles, so that this countryhouse was useless to him, and it was reported to be let to ayoung widow, known only by the name of `the baroness.'

　　"One evening, as I was looking over the wall, I saw a youngand handsome woman who was walking alone in that garden,which was not overlooked by any windows, and I guessed thatshe was awaiting M. de Villefort. When she was sufficientlynear for me to distinguish her features, I saw she was fromeighteen to nineteen, tall and very fair. As she had a loosemuslin dress on and as nothing concealed her figure, I sawshe would ere long become a mother. A few moments after, thelittle door was opened and a man entered. The young womanhastened to meet him. They threw themselves into eachother's arms, embraced tenderly, and returned together tothe house. The man was M. de Villefort; I fully believedthat when he went out in the night he would be forced totraverse the whole of the garden alone."

　　"And," asked the count, "did you ever know the name of thiswoman?"

　　"No, excellency," returned Bertuccio; "you will see that Ihad no time to learn it."

　　"Go on."

　　"That evening," continued Bertuccio, "I could have killedthe procureur, but as I was not sufficiently acquainted withthe neighborhood, I was fearful of not killing him on thespot, and that if his cries were overheard I might be taken;so I put it off until the next occasion, and in order thatnothing should escape me, I took a chamber looking into thestreet bordered by the wall of the garden. Three days after,about seven o'clock in the evening, I saw a servant onhorseback leave the house at full gallop, and take the roadto Sevres. I concluded that he was going to Versailles, andI was not deceived. Three hours later, the man returnedcovered with dust, his errand was performed, and two minutesafter, another man on foot, muffled in a mantle, opened thelittle door of the garden, which he closed after him. Idescended rapidly; although I had not seen Villefort's face,I recognized him by the beating of my heart. I crossed thestreet, and stopped at a post placed at the angle of thewall, and by means of which I had once before looked intothe garden. This time I did not content myself with looking,but I took my knife out of my pocket, felt that the pointwas sharp, and sprang over the wall. My first care was torun to the door; he had left the key in it, taking thesimple precaution of turning it twice in the lock. Nothing,then, preventing my escape by this means, I examined thegrounds. The garden was long and narrow; a stretch of smoothturf extended down the middle, and at the corners wereclumps of trees with thick and massy foliage, that made abackground for the shrubs and flowers. In order to go fromthe door to the house, or from the house to the door, M. deVillefort would be obliged to pass by one of these clumps oftrees.

　　"It was the end of September; the wind blew violently. Thefaint glimpses of the pale moon, hidden momentarily bymasses of dark clouds that were sweeping across the sky,whitened the gravel walks that led to the house, but wereunable to pierce the obscurity of the thick shrubberies, inwhich a man could conceal himself without any fear ofdiscovery. I hid myself in the one nearest to the pathVillefort must take, and scarcely was I there when, amidstthe gusts of wind, I fancied I heard groans; but you know,or rather you do not know, your excellency, that he who isabout to commit an assassination fancies that he hears lowcries perpetually ringing in his ears. Two hours passedthus, during which I imagined I heard moans repeatedly.Midnight struck. As the last stroke died away, I saw a faintlight shine through the windows of the private staircase bywhich we have just descended. The door opened, and the manin the mantle reappeared. The terrible moment had come, butI had so long been prepared for it that my heart did notfail in the least. I drew my knife from my pocket again,opened it, and made ready to strike. The man in the mantleadvanced towards me, but as he drew near I saw that he had aweapon in his hand. I was afraid, not of a struggle, but ofa failure. When he was only a few paces from me, I saw thatwhat I had taken for a weapon was only a spade. I was stillunable to divine for what reason M. de Villefort had thisspade in his hands, when he stopped close to the thicketwhere I was, glanced round, and began to dig a hole in theearth. I then perceived that he was hiding something underhis mantle, which he laid on the grass in order to dig morefreely. Then, I confess, curiosity mingled with hatred; Iwished to see what Villefort was going to do there, and Iremained motionless, holding my breath. Then an idea crossedmy mind, which was confirmed when I saw the procureur liftfrom under his mantle a box, two feet long, and six or eightinches deep. I let him place the box in the hole he hadmade, then, while he stamped with his feet to remove alltraces of his occupation, I rushed on him and plunged myknife into his breast, exclaiming, -- `I am GiovanniBertuccio; thy death for my brother's; thy treasure for hiswidow; thou seest that my vengeance is more complete than Ihad hoped.' I know not if he heard these words; I think hedid not, for he fell without a cry. I felt his blood gushover my face, but I was intoxicated, I was delirious, andthe blood refreshed, instead of burning me. In a second Ihad disinterred the box; then, that it might not be known Ihad done so, I filled up the hole, threw the spade over thewall, and rushed through the door, which I double-locked,carrying off the key."

　　"Ah," said Monte Cristo "it seems to me this was nothing butmurder and robbery."

　　"No, your excellency," returned Bertuccio; "it was avendetta followed by restitution."

　　"And was the sum a large one?"

　　"It was not money."

　　"Ah, I recollect," replied the count; "did you not saysomething of an infant?"

　　"Yes, excellency; I hastened to the river, sat down on thebank, and with my knife forced open the lock of the box. Ina fine linen cloth was wrapped a new-born child. Its purplevisage, and its violet-colored hands showed that it hadperished from suffocation, but as it was not yet cold, Ihesitated to throw it into the water that ran at my feet.After a moment I fancied that I felt a slight pulsation ofthe heart, and as I had been assistant at the hospital atBastia, I did what a doctor would have done -- I inflatedthe lungs by blowing air into them, and at the expiration ofa quarter of an hour, it began to breathe, and cried feebly.In my turn I uttered a cry, but a cry of joy. `God has notcursed me then,' I cried, `since he permits me to save thelife of a human creature, in exchange for the life I havetaken away.'"

　　"And what did you do with the child?" asked Monte Cristo."It was an embarrassing load for a man seeking to escape."

　　"I had not for a moment the idea of keeping it, but I knewthat at Paris there was an asylum where they receive suchcreatures. As I passed the city gates I declared that I hadfound the child on the road, and I inquired where the asylumwas; the box confirmed my statement, the linen proved thatthe infant belonged to wealthy parents, the blood with whichI was covered might have proceeded from the child as well asfrom any one else. No objection was raised, but they pointedout the asylum, which was situated at the upper end of theRue d'Enfer, and after having taken the precaution ofcutting the linen in two pieces, so that one of the twoletters which marked it was on the piece wrapped around thechild, while the other remained in my possession, I rang thebell, and fled with all speed. A fortnight after I was atRogliano, and I said to Assunta, -- `Console thyself,sister; Israel is dead, but he is avenged.' She demandedwhat I meant, and when I had told her all, -- `Giovanni,'said she, `you should have brought this child with you; wewould have replaced the parents it has lost, have called itBenedetto, and then, in consequence of this good action, Godwould have blessed us.' In reply I gave her the half of thelinen I had kept in order to reclaim him if we became rich."

　　"What letters were marked on the linen?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"An H and an N, surmounted by a baron's coronet."

　　"By heaven, M. Bertuccio, you make use of heraldic terms;where did you study heraldry?"

　　"In your service, excellency, where everything is learned."

　　"Go on, I am curious to know two things."

　　"What are they, your excellency ?"

　　"What became of this little boy? for I think you told me itwas a boy, M. Bertuccio."

　　"No excellency, I do not recollect telling you that."

　　"I thought you did; I must have been mistaken."

　　"No, you were not, for it was in reality a little boy. Butyour excellency wished to know two things; what was thesecond?"

　　"The second was the crime of which you were accused when youasked for a confessor, and the Abbe Busoni came to visit youat your request in the prison at Nimes."

　　"The story will be very long, excellency."

　　"What matter? you know I take but little sleep, and I do notsuppose you are very much inclined for it either." Bertucciobowed, and resumed his story.

　　"Partly to drown the recollections of the past that hauntedme, partly to supply the wants of the poor widow, I eagerlyreturned to my trade of smuggler, which had become more easysince that relaxation of the laws which always follows arevolution. The southern districts were ill-watched inparticular, in consequence of the disturbances that wereperpetually breaking out in Avignon, Nimes, or Uzes. Weprofited by this respite on the part of the government tomake friends everywhere. Since my brother's assassination inthe streets of Nimes, I had never entered the town; theresult was that the inn-keeper with whom we were connected,seeing that we would no longer come to him, was forced tocome to us, and had established a branch to his inn, on theroad from Bellegarde to Beaucaire, at the sign of the Pontdu Gard. We had thus, at Aigues-Mortes, Martigues, or Bouc,a dozen places where we left our goods, and where, in caseof necessity, we concealed ourselves from the gendarmes andcustom-house officers. Smuggling is a profitable trade, whena certain degree of vigor and intelligence is employed; asfor myself, brought up in the mountains, I had a doublemotive for fearing the gendarmes and custom-house officers,as my appearance before the judges would cause an inquiry,and an inquiry always looks back into the past. And in mypast life they might find something far more grave than theselling of smuggled cigars, or barrels of brandy without apermit. So, preferring death to capture, I accomplished themost astonishing deeds, and which, more than once, showed methat the too great care we take of our bodies is the onlyobstacle to the success of those projects which requirerapid decision, and vigorous and determined execution. Inreality, when you have once devoted your life to yourenterprises, you are no longer the equal of other men, or,rather, other men are no longer your equals, and whosoeverhas taken this resolution, feels his strength and resourcesdoubled."

　　"Philosophy, M. Bertuccio," interrupted the Count; "you havedone a little of everything in your life."

　　"Oh, excellency,"

　　"No, no; but philosophy at half-past ten at night issomewhat late; yet I have no other observation to make, forwhat you say is correct, which is more than can be said forall philosophy."

　　"My journeys became more and more extensive and moreproductive. Assunta took care of all, and our little fortuneincreased. One day as I was setting off on an expedition,`Go,' said she; `at your return I will give you a surprise.'I questioned her, but in vain; she would tell me nothing,and I departed. Our expedition lasted nearly six weeks; wehad been to Lucca to take in oil, to Leghorn for Englishcottons, and we ran our cargo without opposition, andreturned home full of joy. When I entered the house, thefirst thing I beheld in the middle of Assunta's chamber wasa cradle that might be called sumptuous compared with therest of the furniture, and in it a baby seven or eightmonths old. I uttered a cry of joy; the only moments ofsadness I had known since the assassination of the procureurwere caused by the recollection that I had abandoned thischild. For the assassination itself I had never felt anyremorse. Poor Assunta had guessed all. She had profited bymy absence, and furnished with the half of the linen, andhaving written down the day and hour at which I haddeposited the child at the asylum, had set off for Paris,and had reclaimed it. No objection was raised, and theinfant was given up to her. Ah, I confess, your excellency,when I saw this poor creature sleeping peacefully in itscradle, I felt my eyes filled with tears. `Ah, Assunta,'cried I, `you are an excellent woman, and heaven will blessyou.'"

　　"This," said Monte Cristo, "is less correct than yourphilosophy, -- it is only faith."

　　"Alas, your excellency is right," replied Bertuccio, "andGod made this infant the instrument of our punishment. Neverdid a perverse nature declare itself more prematurely, andyet it was not owing to any fault in his bringing up. He wasa most lovely child, with large blue eyes, of that deepcolor that harmonizes so well with the blond complexion;only his hair, which was too light, gave his face a mostsingular expression, and added to the vivacity of his look,and the malice of his smile. Unfortunately, there is aproverb which says that `red is either altogether good oraltogether bad.' The proverb was but too correct as regardedBenedetto, and even in his infancy he manifested the worstdisposition. It is true that the indulgence of hisfoster-mother encouraged him. This child, for whom my poorsister would go to the town, five or six leagues off, topurchase the earliest fruits and the most temptingsweetmeats, preferred to Palma grapes or Genoese preserves,the chestnuts stolen from a neighbor's orchard, or the driedapples in his loft, when he could eat as well of the nutsand apples that grew in my garden. One day, when Benedettowas about five or six, our neighbor Vasilio, who, accordingto the custom of the country, never locked up his purse orhis valuables -- for, as your excellency knows, there are nothieves in Corsica -- complained that he had lost a louisout of his purse; we thought he must have made a mistake incounting his money, but he persisted in the accuracy of hisstatement. One day, Benedetto, who had been gone from thehouse since morning, to our great anxiety, did not returnuntil late in the evening, dragging a monkey after him,which he said he had found chained to the foot of a tree.For more than a month past, the mischievous child, who knewnot what to wish for, had taken it into his head to have amonkey. A boatman, who had passed by Rogliano, and who hadseveral of these animals, whose tricks had greatly divertedhim, had, doubtless, suggested this idea to him. `Monkeysare not found in our woods chained to trees,' said I;`confess how you obtained this animal.' Benedetto maintainedthe truth of what he had said, and accompanied it withdetails that did more honor to his imagination than to hisveracity. I became angry; he began to laugh, I threatened tostrike him, and he made two steps backwards. `You cannotbeat me,' said he; `you have no right, for you are not myfather.'

　　"We never knew who had revealed this fatal secret, which wehad so carefully concealed from him; however, it was thisanswer, in which the child's whole character revealeditself, that almost terrified me, and my arm fell withouttouching him. The boy triumphed, and this victory renderedhim so audacious, that all the money of Assunta, whoseaffection for him seemed to increase as he became moreunworthy of it, was spent in caprices she knew not how tocontend against, and follies she had not the courage toprevent. When I was at Rogliano everything went on properly,but no sooner was my back turned than Benedetto becamemaster, and everything went ill. When he was only eleven, hechose his companions from among the young men of eighteen ortwenty, the worst characters in Bastia, or, indeed, inCorsica, and they had already, for some mischievous pranks,been several times threatened with a prosecution. I becamealarmed, as any prosecution might be attended with seriousconsequences. I was compelled, at this period, to leaveCorsica on an important expedition; I reflected for a longtime, and with the hope of averting some impendingmisfortune, I resolved that Benedetto should accompany me. Ihoped that the active and laborious life of a smuggler, withthe severe discipline on board, would have a salutary effecton his character, which was now well-nigh, if not quite,corrupt. I spoke to Benedetto alone, and proposed to him toaccompany me, endeavoring to tempt him by all the promisesmost likely to dazzle the imagination of a child of twelve.He heard me patiently, and when I had finished, burst outlaughing.

　　"`Are you mad, uncle?' (he called me by this name when hewas in good humor); `do you think I am going to change thelife I lead for your mode of existence -- my agreeableindolence for the hard and precarious toil you impose onyourself, exposed to the bitter frost at night, and thescorching heat by day, compelled to conceal yourself, andwhen you are perceived, receive a volley of bullets, all toearn a paltry sum? Why, I have as much money as I want;mother Assunta always furnishes me when I ask for it! Yousee that I should be a fool to accept your offer.' Thearguments, and his audacity, perfectly stupefied me.Benedetto rejoined his associates, and I saw him from adistance point me out to them as a fool."

　　"Sweet child," murmured Monte Cristo.

　　"Oh, had he been my own son," replied Bertuccio, "or even mynephew, I would have brought him back to the right road, forthe knowledge that you are doing your duty gives youstrength, but the idea that I was striking a child whosefather I had killed, made it impossible for me to punishhim. I gave my sister, who constantly defended theunfortunate boy, good advice, and as she confessed that shehad several times missed money to a considerable amount, Ishowed her a safe place in which to conceal our littletreasure for the future. My mind was already made up.Benedetto could read, write, and cipher perfectly, for whenthe fit seized him, he learned more in a day than others ina week. My intention was to enter him as a clerk in someship, and without letting him know anything of my plan, toconvey him some morning on board; by this means his futuretreatment would depend upon his own conduct. I set off forFrance, after having fixed upon the plan. Our cargo was tobe landed in the Gulf of Lyons, and this was a difficultthing to do because it was then the year 1829. The mostperfect tranquillity was restored, and the vigilance of thecustom-house officers was redoubled, and their strictnesswas increased at this time, in consequence of the fair atBeaucaire.

　　"Our expedition made a favorable beginning. We anchored ourvessel -- which had a double hold, where our goods wereconcealed -- amidst a number of other vessels that borderedthe banks of the Rhone from Beaucaire to Arles. On ourarrival we began to discharge our cargo in the night, and toconvey it into the town, by the help of the inn-keeper withwhom we were connected. Whether success rendered usimprudent, or whether we were betrayed, I know not; but oneevening, about five o'clock, our little cabin-boy camebreathlessly, to inform us that he had seen a detachment ofcustom-house officers advancing in our direction. It was nottheir proximity that alarmed us, for detachments wereconstantly patrolling along the banks of the Rhone, but thecare, according to the boy's account, that they took toavoid being seen. In an instant we were on the alert, but itwas too late; our vessel was surrounded, and amongst thecustom-house officers I observed several gendarmes, and, asterrified at the sight of their uniforms as I was brave atthe sight of any other, I sprang into the hold, opened aport, and dropped into the river, dived, and only rose atintervals to breathe, until I reached a ditch that hadrecently been made from the Rhone to the canal that runsfrom Beaucaire to Aigues-Mortes. I was now safe, for I couldswim along the ditch without being seen, and I reached thecanal in safety. I had designedly taken this direction. Ihave already told your excellency of an inn-keeper fromNimes who had set up a little tavern on the road fromBellegarde to Beaucaire."

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo "I perfectly recollect him; I thinkhe was your colleague."

　　"Precisely," answered Bertuccio; "but he had, seven or eightyears before this period, sold his establishment to a tailorat Marseilles, who, having almost ruined himself in his oldtrade, wished to make his fortune in another. Of course, wemade the same arrangements with the new landlord that we hadwith the old; and it was of this man that I intended to askshelter."

　　"What was his name?" inquired the count, who seemed tobecome somewhat interested in Bertuccio's story.

　　"Gaspard Caderousse; he had married a woman from the villageof Carconte, and whom we did not know by any other name thanthat of her village. She was suffering from malarial fever,and seemed dying by inches. As for her husband, he was astrapping fellow of forty, or five and forty, who had morethan once, in time of danger, given ample proof of hispresence of mind and courage."

　　"And you say," interrupted Monte Cristo "that this tookplace towards the year" --

　　"1829, your excellency."

　　"In what month?"

　　"June."

　　"The beginning or the end?"

　　"The evening of the 3d."

　　"Ah," said Monte Cristo "the evening of the 3d of June,1829. Go on."

　　"It was from Caderousse that I intended demanding shelter,and, as we never entered by the door that opened onto theroad, I resolved not to break through the rule, so climbingover the garden-hedge, I crept amongst the olive and wildfig trees, and fearing that Caderousse might have someguest, I entered a kind of shed in which I had often passedthe night, and which was only separated from the inn by apartition, in which holes had been made in order to enableus to watch an opportunity of announcing our presence. Myintention was, if Caderousse was alone, to acquaint him withmy presence, finish the meal the custom-house officers hadinterrupted, and profit by the threatened storm to return tothe Rhone, and ascertain the state of our vessel and itscrew. I stepped into the shed, and it was fortunate I didso, for at that moment Caderousse entered with a stranger.

　　"I waited patiently, not to overhear what they said, butbecause I could do nothing else; besides, the same thing hadoccurred often before. The man who was with Caderousse wasevidently a stranger to the South of France; he was one ofthose merchants who come to sell jewellery at the Beaucairefair, and who during the month the fair lasts, and duringwhich there is so great an influx of merchants and customersfrom all parts of Europe, often have dealings to the amountof 100,000 to 150,000 francs. Caderousse entered hastily.Then, seeing that the room was, as usual, empty, and onlyguarded by the dog, he called to his wife, `Hello,Carconte,' said he, `the worthy priest has not deceived us;the diamond is real.' An exclamation of joy was heard, andthe staircase creaked beneath a feeble step. `What do yousay?' asked his wife, pale as death.

　　"`I say that the diamond is real, and that this gentleman,one of the first jewellers of Paris, will give us 50,000francs for it. Only, in order to satisfy himself that itreally belongs to us, he wishes you to relate to him, as Ihave done already, the miraculous manner in which thediamond came into our possession. In the meantime please tosit down, monsieur, and I will fetch you some refreshment.'The jeweller examined attentively the interior of the innand the apparent poverty of the persons who were about tosell him a diamond that seemed to have come from the casketof a prince. `Relate your story, madame,' said he, wishing,no doubt, to profit by the absence of the husband, so thatthe latter could not influence the wife's story, to see ifthe two recitals tallied.

　　"`Oh,' returned she, `it was a gift of heaven. My husbandwas a great friend, in 1814 or 1815, of a sailor namedEdmond Dantes. This poor fellow, whom Caderousse hadforgotten, had not forgotten him, and at his death hebequeathed this diamond to him.' -- `But how did he obtainit?' asked the jeweller; `had he it before he wasimprisoned?' -- `No, monsieur; but it appears that in prisonhe made the acquaintance of a rich Englishman, and as inprison he fell sick, and Dantes took the same care of him asif he had been his brother, the Englishman, when he was setfree, gave this stone to Dantes, who, less fortunate, died,and, in his turn, left it to us, and charged the excellentabbe, who was here this morning, to deliver it.' -- `Thesame story,' muttered the jeweller; `and improbable as itseemed at first, it may be true. There's only the price weare not agreed about.' -- `How not agreed about?' saidCaderousse. `I thought we agreed for the price I asked.' --`That is,' replied the jeweller, `I offered 40,000 francs.'-- `Forty thousand,' cried La Carconte; `we will not partwith it for that sum. The abbe told us it was worth 50,000without the setting.'

　　"`What was the abbe's name?' asked the indefatigablequestioner. -- `The Abbe Busoni,' said La Carconte. -- `Hewas a foreigner?' -- `An Italian, from the neighborhood ofMantua, I believe.' -- `Let me see this diamond again,'replied the jeweller; `the first time you are often mistakenas to the value of a stone.' Caderousse took from his pocketa small case of black shagreen, opened, and gave it to thejeweller. At the sight of the diamond, which was as large asa hazel-nut, La Carconte's eyes sparkled with cupidity."

　　"And what did you think of this fine story, eavesdropper?"said Monte Cristo; "did you credit it?"

　　"Yes, your excellency. I did not look on Caderousse as a badman, and I thought him incapable of committing a crime, oreven a theft."

　　"That did more honor to your heart than to your experience,M. Bertuccio. Had you known this Edmond Dantes, of whom theyspoke?"

　　"No, your excellency, I had never heard of him before, andnever but once afterwards, and that was from the Abbe Busonihimself, when I saw him in the prison at Nimes."

　　"Go on."

　　"The jeweller took the ring, and drawing from his pocket apair of steel pliers and a small set of copper scales, hetook the stone out of its setting, and weighed it carefully.`I will give you 45,000,' said he, `but not a sou more;besides, as that is the exact value of the stone, I broughtjust that sum with me.' -- `Oh, that's no matter,' repliedCaderousse, `I will go back with you to fetch the other5,000 francs.' -- `No,' returned the jeweller, giving backthe diamond and the ring to Caderousse -- `no, it is worthno more, and I am sorry I offered so much, for the stone hasa flaw in it, which I had not seen. However, I will not goback on my word, and I will give 45,000.' -- `At least,replace the diamond in the ring,' said La Carconte sharply.-- `Ah, true,' replied the jeweller, and he reset the stone.-- `No matter,' observed Caderousse, replacing the box inhis pocket, `some one else will purchase it.' -- `Yes,'continued the jeweller; `but some one else will not be soeasy as I am, or content himself with the same story. It isnot natural that a man like you should possess such adiamond. He will inform against you. You will have to findthe Abbe Busoni; and abbes who give diamonds worth twothousand louis are rare. The law would seize it, and put youin prison; if at the end of three or four months you are setat liberty, the ring will be lost, or a false stone, worththree francs, will be given you, instead of a diamond worth50,000 or perhaps 55,000 francs; from which you must allowthat one runs considerable risk in purchasing.' Caderousseand his wife looked eagerly at each other. -- `No,' saidCaderousse, `we are not rich enough to lose 5,000 francs.'-- `As you please, my dear sir,' said the, jeweller; `I had,however, as you see, brought you the money in bright coin.'And he drew from his pocket a handful of gold, and held itsparkling before the dazzled eyes of the innkeeper, and inthe other hand he held a packet of bank-notes.

　　"There was evidently a severe struggle in the mind ofCaderousse; it was plain that the small shagreen case, whichhe turned over and over in his hand, did not seem to himcommensurate in value to the enormous sum which fascinatedhis gaze. He turned towards his wife. `What do you think ofthis?' he asked in a low voice. -- `Let him have it -- lethim have it,' she said. `If he returns to Beaucaire withoutthe diamond, he will inform against us, and, as he says, whoknows if we shall ever again see the Abbe Busoni? -- in allprobability we shall never see him.' -- `Well, then, so Iwill!' said Caderousse; `so you may have the diamond for45,000 francs. But my wife wants a gold chain, and I want apair of silver buckles.' The jeweller drew from his pocket along flat box, which contained several samples of thearticles demanded. `Here,' he said, `I am verystraightforward in my dealings -- take your choice.' Thewoman selected a gold chain worth about five louis, and thehusband a pair of buckles. worth perhaps fifteen francs. --`I hope you will not complain now?' said the jeweller.

　　"`The abbe told me it was worth 50,000 francs,' mutteredCaderousse. `Come, come -- give it to me! What a strangefellow you are,' said the jeweller, taking the diamond fromhis hand. `I give you 45,000 francs -- that is, 2,500 livresof income, -- a fortune such as I wish I had myself, and youare not satisfied!' -- `And the five and forty thousandfrancs,' inquired Caderousse in a hoarse voice, `where arethey? Come -- let us see them.' -- `Here they are,' repliedthe jeweller, and he counted out upon the table 15,000francs in gold, and 30,000 francs in bank-notes.

　　"`Wait while I light the lamp,' said La Carconte; `it isgrowing dark, and there may be some mistake.' In fact, nighthad come on during this conversation, and with night thestorm which had been threatening for the last half-hour. Thethunder growled in the distance; but it was apparently notheard by the jeweller, Caderousse, or La Carconte, absorbedas they were all three with the demon of gain. I myselffelt; a strange kind of fascination at the sight of all thisgold and all these bank-notes; it seemed to me that I was ina dream, and, as it always happens in a dream, I felt myselfriveted to the spot. Caderousse counted and again countedthe gold and the notes, then handed them to his wife, whocounted and counted them again in her turn. During thistime, the jeweller made the diamond play and sparkle in thelamplight, and the gem threw out jets of light which madehim unmindful of those which -- precursors of the storm --began to play in at the windows. `Well,' inquired thejeweller, `is the cash all right?'

　　"`Yes,' said Caderousse. `Give me the pocket-book, LaCarconte, and find a bag somewhere.'

　　"La Carconte went to a cupboard, and returned with an oldleathern pocket-book and a bag. From the former she tooksome greasy letters, and put in their place the bank-notes,and from the bag took two or three crowns of six livreseach, which, in all probability, formed the entire fortuneof the miserable couple. `There,' said Caderousse; `and now,although you have wronged us of perhaps 10,000 francs, willyou have your supper with us? I invite you with good-will.'-- `Thank you,' replied the jeweller, `it must be gettinglate, and I must return to Beaucaire -- my wife will begetting uneasy.' He drew out his watch, and exclaimed,`Morbleu, nearly nine o'clock -- why, I shall not get backto Beaucaire before midnight! Good-night, my friends. If theAbbe Busoni should by any accident return, think of me.' --`In another week you will have left Beaucaire.' remarkedCaderousse, `for the fair ends in a few days.' -- `True, butthat makes no difference. Write to me at Paris, to M.Joannes, in the Palais Royal, arcade Pierre, No. 45. I willmake the journey on purpose to see him, if it is worthwhile.' At this moment there was a tremendous clap ofthunder, accompanied by a flash of lightning so vivid, thatit quite eclipsed the light of the lamp.

　　"`See here,' exclaimed Caderousse. `You cannot think ofgoing out in such weather as this.' -- `Oh, I am not afraidof thunder,' said the jeweller. -- `And then there arerobbers,' said La Carconte. `The road is never very safeduring fair time.' -- `Oh, as to the robbers,' said Joannes,`here is something for them,' and he drew from his pocket apair of small pistols, loaded to the muzzle. `Here,' saidhe, `are dogs who bark and bite at the same time, they arefor the two first who shall have a longing for your diamond,Friend Caderousse.'

　　"Caderousse and his wife again interchanged a meaning look.It seemed as though they were both inspired at the same timewith some horrible thought. `Well, then, a good journey toyou,' said Caderousse. -- `Thanks,' replied the jeweller. Hethen took his cane, which he had placed against an oldcupboard, and went out. At the moment when he opened thedoor, such a gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearlyextinguished. `Oh,' said he, `this is very nice weather, andtwo leagues to go in such a storm.' -- `Remain,' saidCaderousse. `You can sleep here.' -- `Yes; do stay,' addedLa Carconte in a tremulous voice; `we will take every careof you.' -- `No; I must sleep at Beaucaire. So, once more,good-night.' Caderousse followed him slowly to thethreshold. `I can see neither heaven nor earth,' said thejeweller, who was outside the door. `Do I turn to the right,or to the left hand?' -- `To the right,' said Caderousse.`You cannot go wrong -- the road is bordered by trees onboth sides.' -- `Good -- all right,' said a voice almostlost in the distance. `Close the door,' said La Carconte; `Ido not like open doors when it thunders.' -- `Particularlywhen there is money in the house, eh?' answered Caderousse,double-locking the door.

　　"He came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out thebag and pocket-book, and both began, for the third time, tocount their gold and bank-notes. I never saw such anexpression of cupidity as the flickering lamp revealed inthose two countenances. The woman, especially, was hideous;her usual feverish tremulousness was intensified, hercountenance had become livid, and her eyes resembled burningcoals. `Why,' she inquired in a hoarse voice, `did youinvite him to sleep here to-night?' -- `Why?' saidCaderousse with a shudder; `why, that he might not have thetrouble of returning to Beaucaire.' -- `Ah,' responded thewoman, with an expression impossible to describe; `I thoughtit was for something else.' -- `Woman, woman -- why do youhave such ideas?' cried Caderousse; `or, if you have them,why don't you keep them to yourself?' -- `Well,' said LaCarconte, after a moment's pause, `you are not a man.' --`What do you mean?' added Caderousse. -- `If you had been aman, you would not have let him go from here.' -- `Woman!'-- `Or else he should not have reached Beaucaire.' --`Woman!' -- `The road takes a turn -- he is obliged tofollow it -- while alongside of the canal there is a shorterroad.' -- `Woman! -- you offend the good God. There --listen!' And at this moment there was a tremendous peal ofthunder, while the livid lightning illumined the room, andthe thunder, rolling away in the distance, seemed towithdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode. `Mercy!' saidCaderousse, crossing himself.

　　"At the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifyingsilence which usually follows a clap of thunder, they hearda knocking at the door. Caderousse and his wife started andlooked aghast at each other. `Who's there?' criedCaderousse, rising, and drawing up in a heap the gold andnotes scattered over the table, and which he covered withhis two hands. -- `It is I,' shouted a voice. -- `And whoare you?' -- `Eh, pardieu, Joannes, the jeweller.' -- `Well,and you said I offended the good God,' said La Carconte witha horrid smile. `Why, the good God sends him back again.'Caderousse sank pale and breathless into his chair. LaCarconte, on the contrary, rose, and going with a firm steptowards the door, opened it, saying, as she did so -- `Comein, dear M. Joannes.' -- `Ma foi,' said the jeweller,drenched with rain, `I am not destined to return toBeaucaire to-night. The shortest follies are best, my dearCaderousse. You offered me hospitality, and I accept it, andhave returned to sleep beneath your friendly roof.'Caderousse stammered out something, while he wiped away thesweat that started to his brow. La Carconte doubled-lockedthe door behind the jeweller.

　　Chapter 45The Rain of Blood.

　　"As the jeweller returned to the apartment, he cast aroundhim a scrutinizing glance -- but there was nothing to excitesuspicion, if it did not exist, or to confirm it, if it werealready awakened. Caderousse's hands still grasped the goldand bank-notes, and La Carconte called up her sweetestsmiles while welcoming the reappearance of their guest.`Well, well,' said the jeweller, `you seem, my good friends,to have had some fears respecting the accuracy of yourmoney, by counting it over so carefully directly I wasgone.' -- `Oh, no,' answered Caderousse, `that was not myreason, I can assure you; but the circumstances by which wehave become possessed of this wealth are so unexpected, asto make us scarcely credit our good fortune, and it is onlyby placing the actual proof of our riches before our eyesthat we can persuade ourselves that the whole affair is nota dream.' The jeweller smiled. -- `Have you any other guestsin your house?' inquired he. -- `Nobody but ourselves,'replied Caderousse; `the fact is, we do not lodge travellers-- indeed, our tavern is so near the town, that nobody wouldthink of stopping here. -- `Then I am afraid I shall verymuch inconvenience you.' -- `Inconvenience us? Not at all,my dear sir,' said La Carconte in her most gracious manner.`Not at all, I assure you.' -- `But where will you manage tostow me?' -- `In the chamber overhead.' -- `Surely that iswhere you yourselves sleep?' -- `Never mind that; we have asecond bed in the adjoining room.' Caderousse stared at hiswife with much astonishment.

　　"The jeweller, meanwhile, was humming a song as he stoodwarming his back at the fire La Carconte had kindled to drythe wet garments of her guest; and this done, she nextoccupied herself in arranging his supper, by spreading anapkin at the end of the table, and placing on it theslender remains of their dinner, to which she added three orfour fresh-laid eggs. Caderousse had once more parted withhis treasure -- the banknotes were replaced in thepocket-book, the gold put back into the bag, and the wholecarefully locked in the cupboard. He then began pacing theroom with a pensive and gloomy air, glancing from time totime at the jeweller, who stood reeking with the steam fromhis wet clothes, and merely changing his place on the warmhearth, to enable the whole of his garments to be dried.

　　"`There,' said La Carconte, as she placed a bottle of wineon the table, `supper is ready whenever you are.' -- `Andyou?' asked Joannes. -- `I don't want any supper,' saidCaderousse. -- `We dined so very late,' hastily interposedLa Carconte. -- `Then it seems I am to eat alone,' remarkedthe jeweller. -- `Oh, we shall have the pleasure of waitingupon you,' answered La Carconte, with an eager attention shewas not accustomed to manifest even to guests who paid forwhat they took.

　　"From time to time Caderousse darted on his wife keen,searching glances, but rapid as the lightning flash. Thestorm still continued. `There, there,' said La Carconte; `doyou hear that? upon my word, you did well to come back.' --`Nevertheless,' replied the jeweller, `if by the time I havefinished my supper the tempest has at all abated, I shallmake another start.' -- `It's the mistral,' said Caderousse,`and it will be sure to last till to-morrow morning.' Hesighed heavily. -- `Well,' said the jeweller, as he placedhimself at table, `all I can say is, so much the worse forthose who are abroad.' -- `Yes,' chimed in La Carconte,`they will have a wretched night of it.'

　　"The jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, whowas ordinarily so querulous and indifferent to all whoapproached her, was suddenly transformed into the mostsmiling and attentive hostess. Had the unhappy man on whomshe lavished her assiduities been previously acquainted withher, so sudden an alteration might well have excitedsuspicion in his mind, or at least have greatly astonishedhim. Caderousse, meanwhile, continued to pace the room ingloomy silence, sedulously avoiding the sight of his guest;but as soon as the stranger had completed his repast, theagitated inn-keeper went eagerly to the door and opened it.`I believe the storm is over,' said he. But as if tocontradict his statement, at that instant a violent clap ofthunder seemed to shake the house to its very foundation,while a sudden gust of wind, mingled with rain, extinguishedthe lamp he held in his hand. Trembling and awe-struck,Caderousse hastily shut the door and returned to his guest,while La Carconte lighted a candle by the smouldering ashesthat glimmered on the hearth. `You must be tired,' said sheto the jeweller; `I have spread a pair of white sheets onyour bed; go up when you are ready, and sleep well.'

　　"Joannes stayed for a while to see whether the storm seemedto abate in its fury, but a brief space of time sufficed toassure him that, instead of diminishing, the violence of therain and thunder momentarily increased; resigning himself,therefore, to what seemed inevitable, he bade his hostgood-night, and mounted the stairs. He passed over my headand I heard the flooring creak beneath his footsteps. Thequick, eager glance of La Carconte followed him as heascended, while Caderousse, on the contrary, turned hisback, and seemed most anxiously to avoid even glancing athim.

　　"All these circumstances did not strike me as painfully atthe time as they have since done; in fact, all that hadhappened (with the exception of the story of the diamond,which certainly did wear an air of improbability), appearednatural enough, and called for neither apprehension normistrust; but, worn out as I was with fatigue, and fullypurposing to proceed onwards directly the tempest abated, Idetermined to obtain a few hours' sleep. Overhead I couldaccurately distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who,after making the best arrangements in his power for passinga comfortable night, threw himself on his bed, and I couldhear it creak and groan beneath his weight. Insensibly myeyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having nosuspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off. Ilooked into the kitchen once more and saw Caderousse sittingby the side of a long table upon one of the low woodenstools which in country places are frequently used insteadof chairs; his back was turned towards me, so that I couldnot see the expression of his countenance -- neither shouldI have been able to do so had he been placed differently, ashis head was buried between his two hands. La Carcontecontinued to gaze on him for some time, then shrugging hershoulders, she took her seat immediately opposite to him. Atthis moment the expiring embers threw up a fresh flame fromthe kindling of a piece of wood that lay near, and a brightlight flashed over the room. La Carconte still kept her eyesfixed on her husband, but as he made no sign of changing hisposition, she extended her hard, bony hand, and touched himon the forehead.

　　"Caderousse shuddered. The woman's lips seemed to move, asthough she were talking; but because she merely spoke in anundertone, or my senses were dulled by sleep, I did notcatch a word she uttered. Confused sights and sounds seemedto float before me, and gradually I fell into a deep, heavyslumber. How long I had been in this unconscious state Iknow not, when I was suddenly aroused by the report of apistol, followed by a fearful cry. Weak and totteringfootsteps resounded across the chamber above me, and thenext instant a dull, heavy weight seemed to fall powerlesson the staircase. I had not yet fully recoveredconsciousness, when again I heard groans, mingled withhalf-stifled cries, as if from persons engaged in a deadlystruggle. A cry more prolonged than the others and ending ina series of groans effectually roused me from my drowsylethargy. Hastily raising myself on one arm, I lookedaround, but all was dark; and it seemed to me as if the rainmust have penetrated through the flooring of the room above,for some kind of moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop,upon my forehead, and when I passed my hand across my brow,I felt that it was wet and clammy.

　　"To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeededthe most perfect silence -- unbroken, save by the footstepsof a man walking about in the chamber above. The staircasecreaked, he descended into the room below, approached thefire and lit a candle. The man was Caderousse -- he was paleand his shirt was all blood. Having obtained the light, hehurried up-stairs again, and once more I heard his rapid anduneasy footsteps. A moment later he came down again, holdingin his hand the small shagreen case, which he opened, toassure himself it contained the diamond, -- seemed tohesitate as to which pocket he should put it in, then, as ifdissatisfied with the security of either pocket, hedeposited it in his red handkerchief, which he carefullyrolled round his head. After this he took from his cupboardthe bank-notes and gold he had put there, thrust the oneinto the pocket of his trousers, and the other into that ofhis waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of linen, andrushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of thenight.

　　"Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproachedmyself with what had happened, as though I myself had donethe guilty deed. I fancied that I still heard faint moans,and imagining that the unfortunate jeweller might not bequite dead, I determined to go to his relief, by way ofatoning in some slight degree, not for the crime I hadcommitted, but for that which I had not endeavored toprevent. For this purpose I applied all the strength Ipossessed to force an entrance from the cramped spot inwhich I lay to the adjoining room. The poorly fastenedboards which alone divided me from it yielded to my efforts,and I found myself in the house. Hastily snatching up thelighted candle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway abody was lying quite across the stairs. It was that of LaCarconte. The pistol I had heard had doubtless been fired ather. The shot had frightfully lacerated her throat, leavingtwo gaping wounds from which, as well as the mouth, theblood was pouring in floods. She was stone dead. I strodepast her, and ascended to the sleeping chamber, whichpresented an appearance of the wildest disorder. Thefurniture had been knocked over in the deadly struggle thathad taken place there, and the sheets, to which theunfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were draggedacross the room. The murdered man lay on the floor, his headleaning against the wall, and about him was a pool of bloodwhich poured forth from three large wounds in his breast;there was a fourth gash, in which a long table knife wasplunged up to the handle.

　　"I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine -- it wasthe second pistol, which had not gone off, probably from thepowder being wet. I approached the jeweller, who was notquite dead, and at the sound of my footsteps and thecreaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them on mewith an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as thoughtrying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell back andexpired. This appalling sight almost bereft me of my senses,and finding that I could no longer be of service to any onein the house, my only desire was to fly. I rushed towardsthe staircase, clutching my hair, and uttering a groan ofhorror. Upon reaching the room below, I found five or sixcustom-house officers, and two or three gendarmes -- allheavily armed. They threw themselves upon me. I made noresistance; I was no longer master of my senses. When Istrove to speak, a few inarticulate sounds alone escaped mylips.

　　"As I noticed the significant manner in which the wholeparty pointed to my blood-stained garments, I involuntarilysurveyed myself, and then I discovered that the thick warmdrops that had so bedewed me as I lay beneath the staircasemust have been the blood of La Carconte. I pointed to thespot where I had concealed myself. `What does he mean?'asked a gendarme. One of the officers went to the place Idirected. `He means,' replied the man upon his return, `thathe got in that way;' and he showed the hole I had made whenI broke through.

　　"Then I saw that they took me for the assassin. I recoveredforce and energy enough to free myself from the hands ofthose who held me, while I managed to stammer forth -- `Idid not do it! Indeed, indeed I did not!' A couple ofgendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against mybreast. -- `Stir but a step,' said they, `and you are a deadman.' -- `Why should you threaten me with death,' cried I,`when I have already declared my innocence?' -- `Tush,tush,' cried the men; `keep your innocent stories to tell tothe judge at Nimes. Meanwhile, come along with us; and thebest advice we can give you is to do so unresistingly.'Alas, resistance was far from my thoughts. I was utterlyoverpowered by surprise and terror; and without a word Isuffered myself to be handcuffed and tied to a horse's tail,and thus they took me to Nimes.

　　"I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sightof me near the tavern; feeling certain that I intended topass the night there, he had returned to summon hiscomrades, who just arrived in time to hear the report of thepistol, and to take me in the midst of such circumstantialproofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving myinnocence utterly futile. One only chance was left me, thatof beseeching the magistrate before whom I was taken tocause every inquiry to be made for the Abbe Busoni, who hadstopped at the inn of the Pont du Gard on that morning. IfCaderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond,and there existed no such person as the Abbe Busoni, then,indeed, I was lost past redemption, or, at least, my lifehung upon the feeble chance of Caderousse himself beingapprehended and confessing the whole truth. Two monthspassed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while I mustdo the magistrate the justice to say that he used everymeans to obtain information of the person I declared couldexculpate me if he would. Caderousse still evaded allpursuit, and I had resigned myself to what seemed myinevitable fate. My trial was to come on at the approachingassizes; when, on the 8th of September -- that is to say,precisely three months and five days after the events whichhad perilled my life -- the Abbe Busoni, whom I neverventured to believe I should see, presented himself at theprison doors, saying he understood one of the prisonerswished to speak to him; he added, that having learned atMarseilles the particulars of my imprisonment, he hastenedto comply with my desire. You may easily imagine with whateagerness I welcomed him, and how minutely I related thewhole of what I had seen and heard. I felt some degree ofnervousness as I entered upon the history of the diamond,but, to my inexpressible astonishment, he confirmed it inevery particular, and to my equal surprise, he seemed toplace entire belief in all I said. And then it was that, wonby his mild charity, seeing that he was acquainted with allthe habits and customs of my own country, and consideringalso that pardon for the only crime of which I was reallyguilty might come with a double power from lips sobenevolent and kind, I besought him to receive myconfession, under the seal of which I recounted the Auteuilaffair in all its details, as well as every othertransaction of my life. That which I had done by the impulseof my best feelings produced the same effect as though ithad been the result of calculation. My voluntary confessionof the assassination at Auteuil proved to him that I had notcommitted that of which I stood accused. When he quitted me,he bade me be of good courage, and to rely upon his doingall in his power to convince my judges of my innocence.

　　"I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbe was engaged inmy behalf, for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviatedby many trifling though acceptable indulgences, and I wastold that my trial was to be postponed to the assizesfollowing those now being held. In the interim it pleasedprovidence to cause the apprehension of Caderousse, who wasdiscovered in some distant country, and brought back toFrance, where he made a full confession, refusing to makethe fact of his wife's having suggested and arranged themurder any excuse for his own guilt. The wretched man wassentenced to the galleys for life, and I was immediately setat liberty."

　　"And then it was, I presume," said Monte Cristo "that youcame to me as the bearer of a letter from the Abbe Busoni?"

　　"It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbe took anevident interest in all that concerned me.

　　"`Your mode of life as a smuggler,' said he to me one day,`will be the ruin of you; if you get out, don't take it upagain.' -- `But how,' inquired I, `am I to maintain myselfand my poor sister?'

　　"`A person, whose confessor I am,' replied he, `and whoentertains a high regard for me, applied to me a short timesince to procure him a confidential servant. Would you likesuch a post? If so, I will give you a letter of introductionto him.' -- `Oh, father,' I exclaimed, `you are very good.'

　　"`But you must swear solemnly that I shall never have reasonto repent my recommendation.' I extended my hand, and wasabout to pledge myself by any promise he would dictate, buthe stopped me. `It is unnecessary for you to bind yourselfby any vow,' said he; `I know and admire the Corsican naturetoo well to fear you. Here, take this,' continued he, afterrapidly writing the few lines I brought to your excellency,and upon receipt of which you deigned to receive me intoyour service, and proudly I ask whether your excellency hasever had cause to repent having done so?"

　　"No," replied the count; "I take pleasure in saying that youhave served me faithfully, Bertuccio; but you might haveshown more confidence in me."

　　"I, your excellency?"

　　"Yes; you. How comes it, that having both a sister and anadopted son, you have never spoken to me of either?"

　　"Alas, I have still to recount the most distressing periodof my life. Anxious as you may suppose I was to behold andcomfort my dear sister, I lost no time in hastening toCorsica, but when I arrived at Rogliano I found a house ofmourning, the consequences of a scene so horrible that theneighbors remember and speak of it to this day. Acting by myadvice, my poor sister had refused to comply with theunreasonable demands of Benedetto, who was continuallytormenting her for money, as long as he believed there was asou left in her possession. One morning that he had demandedmoney, threatening her with the severest consequences if shedid not supply him with what he desired, he disappeared andremained away all day, leaving the kind-hearted Assunta, wholoved him as if he were her own child, to weep over hisconduct and bewail his absence. Evening came, and still,with all the patient solicitude of a mother, she watched forhis return.

　　"As the eleventh hour struck, he entered with a swaggeringair, attended by two of the most dissolute and reckless ofhis boon companions. She stretched out her arms to him, butthey seized hold of her, and one of the three -- none otherthan the accursed Benedetto exclaimed, -- `Put her totorture and she'll soon tell us where her money is.'

　　"It unfortunately happened that our neighbor, Vasilio, wasat Bastia, leaving no person in his house but his wife; nohuman creature beside could hear or see anything that tookplace within our dwelling. Two held poor Assunta, who,unable to conceive that any harm was intended to her, smiledin the face of those who were soon to become herexecutioners. The third proceeded to barricade the doors andwindows, then returned, and the three united in stifling thecries of terror incited by the sight of these preparations,and then dragged Assunta feet foremost towards the brazier,expecting to wring from her an avowal of where her supposedtreasure was secreted. In the struggle her clothes caughtfire, and they were obliged to let go their hold in order topreserve themselves from sharing the same fate. Covered withflames, Assunta rushed wildly to the door, but it wasfastened; she flew to the windows, but they were alsosecured; then the neighbors heard frightful shrieks; it wasAssunta calling for help. The cries died away in groans, andnext morning, as soon as Vasilio's wife could muster upcourage to venture abroad, she caused the door of ourdwelling to be opened by the public authorities, whenAssunta, although dreadfully burnt, was found stillbreathing; every drawer and closet in the house had beenforced open, and the money stolen. Benedetto never againappeared at Rogliano, neither have I since that day eitherseen or heard anything concerning him.

　　"It was subsequently to these dreadful events that I waitedon your excellency, to whom it would have been folly to havementioned Benedetto, since all trace of him seemed entirelylost; or of my sister, since she was dead."

　　"And in what light did you view the occurrence?" inquiredMonte Cristo.

　　"As a punishment for the crime I had committed," answeredBertuccio. "Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!"

　　"Truly they are," murmured the count in a lugubrious tone.

　　"And now," resumed Bertuccio, "your excellency may, perhaps,be able to comprehend that this place, which I revisit forthe first time -- this garden, the actual scene of my crime-- must have given rise to reflections of no very agreeablenature, and produced that gloom and depression of spiritswhich excited the notice of your excellency, who was pleasedto express a desire to know the cause. At this instant ashudder passes over me as I reflect that possibly I am nowstanding on the very grave in which lies M. de Villefort, bywhose hand the ground was dug to receive the corpse of hischild."

　　"Everything is possible," said Monte Cristo, rising from thebench on which he had been sitting; "even," he added in aninaudible voice, "even that the procureur be not dead. TheAbbe Busoni did right to send you to me," he went on in hisordinary tone, "and you have done well in relating to me thewhole of your history, as it will prevent my forming anyerroneous opinions concerning you in future. As for thatBenedetto, who so grossly belied his name, have you nevermade any effort to trace out whither he has gone, or whathas become of him?"

　　"No; far from wishing to learn whither he has betakenhimself, I should shun the possibility of meeting him as Iwould a wild beast. Thank God, I have never heard his namementioned by any person, and I hope and believe he is dead."

　　"Do not think so, Bertuccio," replied the count; "for thewicked are not so easily disposed of, for God seems to havethem under his special watch-care to make of theminstruments of his vengeance."

　　"So be it," responded Bertuccio, "all I ask of heaven isthat I may never see him again. And now, your excellency,"he added, bowing his head, "you know everything -- you aremy judge on earth, as the Almighty is in heaven; have youfor me no words of consolation?"

　　"My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed toyou by the Abbe Busoni. Villefort merited punishment forwhat he had done to you, and, perhaps, to others. Benedetto,if still living, will become the instrument of divineretribution in some way or other, and then be duly punishedin his turn. As far as you yourself are concerned, I see butone point in which you are really guilty. Ask yourself,wherefore, after rescuing the infant from its living grave,you did not restore it to its mother? There was the crime,Bertuccio -- that was where you became really culpable."

　　"True, excellency, that was the crime, the real crime, forin that I acted like a coward. My first duty, directly I hadsucceeded in recalling the babe to life, was to restore itto its mother; but, in order to do so, I must have madeclose and careful inquiry, which would, in all probability,have led to my own apprehension; and I clung to life, partlyon my sister's account, and partly from that feeling ofpride inborn in our hearts of desiring to come off untouchedand victorious in the execution of our vengeance. Perhaps,too, the natural and instinctive love of life made me wishto avoid endangering my own. And then, again, I am not asbrave and courageous as was my poor brother." Bertuccio hidhis face in his hands as he uttered these words, while MonteCristo fixed on him a look of inscrutable meaning. After abrief silence, rendered still more solemn by the time andplace, the count said, in a tone of melancholy wholly unlikehis usual manner, "In order to bring this conversation to afitting termination (the last we shall ever hold upon thissubject), I will repeat to you some words I have heard fromthe lips of the Abbe Busoni. For all evils there are tworemedies -- time and silence. And now leave me, MonsieurBertuccio, to walk alone here in the garden. The verycircumstances which inflict on you, as a principal in thetragic scene enacted here, such painful emotions, are to me,on the contrary, a source of something like contentment, andserve but to enhance the value of this dwelling in myestimation. The chief beauty of trees consists in the deepshadow of their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures amoving multitude of shapes and forms flitting and passingbeneath that shade. Here I have a garden laid out in such away as to afford the fullest scope for the imagination, andfurnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose leafyscreen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms atwill. This to me, who expected but to find a blank enclosuresurrounded by a straight wall, is, I assure you, a mostagreeable surprise. I have no fear of ghosts, and I havenever heard it said that so much harm had been done by thedead during six thousand years as is wrought by the livingin a single day. Retire within, Bertuccio, and tranquillizeyour mind. Should your confessor be less indulgent to you inyour dying moments than you found the Abbe Busoni, send forme, if I am still on earth, and I will soothe your ears withwords that shall effectually calm and soothe your partingsoul ere it goes forth to traverse the ocean calledeternity."

　　Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighingheavily. Monte Cristo, left alone, took three or four stepsonwards, and murmured, "Here, beneath this plane-tree, musthave been where the infant's grave was dug. There is thelittle door opening into the garden. At this corner is theprivate staircase communicating with the sleeping apartment.There will be no necessity for me to make a note of theseparticulars, for there, before my eyes, beneath my feet, allaround me, I have the plan sketched with all the livingreality of truth." After making the tour of the garden asecond time, the count re-entered his carriage, whileBertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression of hismaster's features, took his seat beside the driver withoututtering a word. The carriage proceeded rapidly towardsParis.

　　That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the ChampsElysees, the Count of Monte Cristo went over the wholebuilding with the air of one long acquainted with each nookor corner. Nor, although preceding the party, did he oncemistake one door for another, or commit the smallest errorwhen choosing any particular corridor or staircase toconduct him to a place or suite of rooms he desired tovisit. Ali was his principal attendant during this nocturnalsurvey. Having given various orders to Bertuccio relative tothe improvements and alterations he desired to make in thehouse, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to theattentive Nubian, "It is half-past eleven o'clock; Haideewill soon he here. Have the French attendants been summonedto await her coming?" Ali extended his hands towards theapartments destined for the fair Greek, which were soeffectually concealed by means of a tapestried entrance,that it would have puzzled the most curious to have divinedtheir existence. Ali, having pointed to the apartments, heldup three fingers of his right hand, and then, placing itbeneath his head, shut his eyes, and feigned to sleep. "Iunderstand," said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali'spantomime; "you mean to tell me that three female attendantsawait their new mistress in her sleeping-chamber." Ali, withconsiderable animation, made a sign in the affirmative.

　　"Madame will be tired to-night," continued Monte Cristo,"and will, no doubt, wish to rest. Desire the Frenchattendants not to weary her with questions, but merely topay their respectful duty and retire. You will also see thatthe Greek servants hold no communication with those of thiscountry." He bowed. Just at that moment voices were heardhailing the concierge. The gate opened, a carriage rolleddown the avenue, and stopped at the steps. The count hastilydescended, presented himself at the already opened carriagedoor, and held out his hand to a young woman, completelyenveloped in a green silk mantle heavily embroidered withgold. She raised the hand extended towards her to her lips,and kissed it with a mixture of love and respect. Some fewwords passed between them in that sonorous language in whichHomer makes his gods converse. The young woman spoke with anexpression of deep tenderness, while the count replied withan air of gentle gravity. Preceded by Ali, who carried arose-colored flambeau in his hand, the new-comer, who was noother than the lovely Greek who had been Monte Cristo'scompanion in Italy, was conducted to her apartments, whilethe count retired to the pavilion reserved for himself. Inanother hour every light in the house was extinguished, andit might have been thought that all its inmates slept.

　　Chapter 46Unlimited Credit.

　　About two o'clock the following day a calash, drawn by apair of magnificent English horses, stopped at the door ofMonte Cristo and a person, dressed in a blue coat, withbuttons of a similar color, a white waistcoat, over whichwas displayed a massive gold chain, brown trousers, and aquantity of black hair descending so low over his eyebrowsas to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial solittle did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deepwrinkles stamped on his features -- a person, in a word,who, although evidently past fifty, desired to be taken fornot more than forty, bent forwards from the carriage door,on the panels of which were emblazoned the armorial bearingsof a baron, and directed his groom to inquire at theporter's lodge whether the Count of Monte Cristo residedthere, and if he were within. While waiting, the occupant ofthe carriage surveyed the house, the garden as far as hecould distinguish it, and the livery of servants who passedto and fro, with an attention so close as to be somewhatimpertinent. His glance was keen but showed cunning ratherthan intelligence; his lips were straight, and so thin that,as they closed, they were drawn in over the teeth; hischeek-bones were broad and projecting, a never-failing proofof audacity and craftiness; while the flatness of hisforehead, and the enlargement of the back of his skull,which rose much higher than his large and coarsely shapedears, combined to form a physiognomy anything butprepossessing, save in the eyes of such as considered thatthe owner of so splendid an equipage must needs be all thatwas admirable and enviable, more especially when they gazedon the enormous diamond that glittered in his shirt, and thered ribbon that depended from his button-hole.

　　The groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the windowof the porter's lodge, saying, "Pray, does not the Count ofMonte Cristo live here?"

　　"His excellency does reside here," replied the concierge;"but" -- added he, glancing an inquiring look at Ali. Alireturned a sign in the negative. "But what?" asked thegroom.

　　"His excellency does not receive visitors to-day."

　　"Then here is my master's card, -- the Baron Danglars. Youwill take it to the count, and say that, although in hasteto attend the Chamber, my master came out of his way to havethe honor of calling upon him."

　　"I never speak to his excellency," replied the concierge;"the valet de chambre will carry your message." The groomreturned to the carriage. "Well?" asked Danglars. The man,somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he had received,repeated what the concierge had said. "Bless me," murmuredBaron Danglars, "this must surely be a prince instead of acount by their styling him `excellency,' and only venturingto address him by the medium of his valet de chambre.However, it does not signify; he has a letter of credit onme, so I must see him when he requires his money."

　　Then, throwing himself back in his carriage, Danglars calledout to his coachman, in a voice that might be heard acrossthe road, "To the Chamber of Deputies."

　　Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had,from behind the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observedthe baron, by means of an excellent lorgnette, as Danglarshimself had scrutinized the house, garden, and servants."That fellow has a decidedly bad countenance," said thecount in a tone of disgust, as he shut up his glass into itsivory case. "How comes it that all do not retreat inaversion at sight of that flat, receding, serpent-likeforehead, round, vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked nose,like the beak of a buzzard? Ali," cried he, striking at thesame time on the brazen gong. Ali appeared. "SummonBertuccio," said the count. Almost immediately Bertuccioentered the apartment. "Did your excellency desire to seeme?" inquired he. "I did," replied the count. "You no doubtobserved the horses standing a few minutes since at thedoor?"

　　"Certainly, your excellency. I noticed them for theirremarkable beauty."

　　"Then how comes it," said Monte Cristo with a frown, "that,when I desired you to purchase for me the finest pair ofhorses to be found in Paris, there is another pair, fully asfine as mine, not in my stables?" At the look ofdispleasure, added to the angry tone in which the countspoke, Ali turned pale and held down his head. "It is notyour fault, my good Ali," said the count in the Arabiclanguage, and with a gentleness none would have thought himcapable of showing, either in voice or face -- "it is notyour fault. You do not understand the points of Englishhorses." The countenance of poor Ali recovered its serenity."Permit me to assure your excellency," said Bertuccio, "thatthe horses you speak of were not to be sold when I purchasedyours." Monte Cristo shrugged his shoulders. "It seems, sirsteward," said he, "that you have yet to learn that allthings are to be sold to such as care to pay the price."

　　"His excellency is not, perhaps, aware that M. Danglars gave16,000 francs for his horses?"

　　"Very well. Then offer him double that sum; a banker neverloses an opportunity of doubling his capital."

　　"Is your excellency really in earnest?" inquired thesteward. Monte Cristo regarded the person who durst presumeto doubt his words with the look of one equally surprisedand displeased. "I have to pay a visit this evening,"replied he. "I desire that these horses, with completely newharness, may be at the door with my carriage." Bertucciobowed, and was about to retire; but when he reached thedoor, he paused, and then said, "At what o'clock does yourexcellency wish the carriage and horses to be ready?"

　　"At five o'clock," replied the count.

　　"I beg your excellency's pardon," interposed the steward ina deprecating manner, "for venturing to observe that it isalready two o'clock."

　　"I am perfectly aware of that fact," answered Monte Cristocalmly. Then, turning towards Ali, he said, "Let all thehorses in my stables be led before the windows of your younglady, that she may select those she prefers for hercarriage. Request her also to oblige me by saying whether itis her pleasure to dine with me; if so, let dinner be servedin her apartments. Now, leave me, and desire my valet dechambre to come hither." Scarcely had Ali disappeared whenthe valet entered the chamber. "Monsieur Baptistin," saidthe count, "you have been in my service one year, the time Igenerally give myself to judge of the merits or demerits ofthose about me. You suit me very well." Baptistin bowed low."It only remains for me to know whether I also suit you?"

　　"Oh, your excellency!" exclaimed Baptistin eagerly.

　　"Listen, if you please, till I have finished speaking,"replied Monte Cristo. "You receive 1,500 francs per annumfor your services here -- more than many a brave subaltern,who continually risks his life for his country, obtains. Youlive in a manner far superior to many clerks who work tentimes harder than you do for their money. Then, thoughyourself a servant, you have other servants to wait uponyou, take care of your clothes, and see that your linen isduly prepared for you. Again, you make a profit upon eacharticle you purchase for my toilet, amounting in the courseof a year to a sum equalling your wages."

　　"Nay, indeed, your excellency."

　　"I am not condemning you for this, Monsieur Baptistin; butlet your profits end here. It would be long indeed ere youwould find so lucrative a post as that you have how the goodfortune to fill. I neither ill-use nor ill-treat my servantsby word or action. An error I readily forgive, but wilfulnegligence or forgetfulness, never. My commands areordinarily short, clear, and precise; and I would rather beobliged to repeat my words twice, or even three times, thanthey should be misunderstood. I am rich enough to knowwhatever I desire to know, and I can promise you I am notwanting in curiosity. If, then, I should learn that you hadtaken upon yourself to speak of me to any one favorably orunfavorably, to comment on my actions, or watch my conduct,that very instant you would quit my service. You may nowretire. I never caution my servants a second time --remember that." Baptistin bowed, and was proceeding towardsthe door. "I forgot to mention to you," said the count,"that I lay yearly aside a certain sum for each servant inmy establishment; those whom I am compelled to dismiss lose(as a matter of course) all participation in this money,while their portion goes to the fund accumulating for thosedomestics who remain with me, and among whom it will bedivided at my death. You have been in my service a year,your fund has already begun to accumulate -- let it continueto do so."

　　This address, delivered in the presence of Ali, who, notunderstanding one word of the language in which it wasspoken, stood wholly unmoved, produced an effect on M.Baptistin only to be conceived by such as have occasion tostudy the character and disposition of French domestics. "Iassure your excellency," said he, "that at least it shall bemy study to merit your approbation in all things, and I willtake M. Ali as my model."

　　"By no means," replied the count in the most frigid tones;"Ali has many faults mixed with most excellent qualities. Hecannot possibly serve you as a pattern for your conduct, notbeing, as you are, a paid servant, but a mere slave -- adog, who, should he fail in his duty towards me, I shouldnot discharge from my service, but kill." Baptistin openedhis eyes with astonishment.

　　"You seen incredulous," said Monte Cristo who repeated toAli in the Arabic language what he had just been saying toBaptistin in French. The Nubian smiled assentingly to hismaster's words, then, kneeling on one knee, respectfullykissed the hand of the count. This corroboration of thelesson he had just received put the finishing stroke to thewonder and stupefaction of M. Baptistin. The count thenmotioned the valet de chambre to retire, and to Ali tofollow to his study, where they conversed long and earnestlytogether. As the hand of the clock pointed to five the countstruck thrice upon his gong. When Ali was wanted one strokewas given, two summoned Baptistin, and three Bertuccio. Thesteward entered. "My horses," said Monte Cristo.

　　"They are at the door harnessed to the carriage as yourexcellency desired. Does your excellency wish me toaccompany him?"

　　"No, the coachman, Ali, and Baptistin will go." The countdescended to the door of his mansion, and beheld hiscarriage drawn by the very pair of horses he had so muchadmired in the morning as the property of Danglars. As hepassed them he said -- "They are extremely handsomecertainly, and you have done well to purchase them, althoughyou were somewhat remiss not to have procured them sooner."

　　"Indeed, your excellency, I had very considerable difficultyin obtaining them, and, as it is, they have cost an enormousprice."

　　"Does the sum you gave for them make the animals lessbeautiful," inquired the count, shrugging his shoulders.

　　"Nay, if your excellency is satisfied, it is all that Icould wish. Whither does your excellency desire to bedriven?"

　　"To the residence of Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chausseed'Antin." This conversation had passed as they stood uponthe terrace, from which a flight of stone steps led to thecarriage-drive. As Bertuccio, with a respectful bow, wasmoving away, the count called him back. "I have anothercommission for you, M. Bertuccio," said he; "I am desirousof having an estate by the seaside in Normandy -- forinstance, between Havre and Boulogne. You see I give you awide range. It will be absolutely necessary that the placeyou may select have a small harbor, creek, or bay, intowhich my corvette can enter and remain at anchor. She drawsonly fifteen feet. She must be kept in constant readiness tosail immediately I think proper to give the signal. Make therequisite inquiries for a place of this description, andwhen you have met with an eligible spot, visit it, and if itpossess the advantages desired, purchase it at once in yourown name. The corvette must now, I think, be on her way toFecamp, must she not?"

　　"Certainly, your excellency; I saw her put to sea the sameevening we quitted Marseilles."

　　"And the yacht."

　　"Was ordered to remain at Martigues."

　　"'Tis well. I wish you to write from time to time to thecaptains in charge of the two vessels so as to keep them onthe alert."

　　"And the steamboat?"

　　"She is at Chalons?"

　　"Yes."

　　"The same orders for her as for the two sailing vessels."

　　"Very good."

　　"When you have purchased the estate I desire, I wantconstant relays of horses at ten leagues apart along thenorthern and southern road."

　　"Your excellency may depend upon me." The Count made agesture of satisfaction, descended the terrace steps, andsprang into his carriage, which was whirled along swiftly tothe banker's house. Danglars was engaged at that moment,presiding over a railroad committee. But the meeting wasnearly concluded when the name of his visitor was announced.As the count's title sounded on his ear he rose, andaddressing his colleagues, who were members of one or theother Chamber, he said, -- "Gentlemen, pardon me for leavingyou so abruptly; but a most ridiculous circumstance hasoccurred, which is this, -- Thomson & French, the Romanbankers, have sent to me a certain person calling himselfthe Count of Monte Cristo, and have given him an unlimitedcredit with me. I confess this is the drollest thing I haveever met with in the course of my extensive foreigntransactions, and you may readily suppose it has greatlyroused my curiosity. I took the trouble this morning to callon the pretended count -- if he were a real count hewouldn't be so rich. But, would you believe it, `He was notreceiving.' So the master of Monte Cristo gives himself airsbefitting a great millionaire or a capricious beauty. I madeinquiries, and found that the house in the Champs Elysees ishis own property, and certainly it was very decently keptup. But," pursued Danglars with one of his sinister smiles,"an order for unlimited credit calls for something likecaution on the part of the banker to whom that order isgiven. I am very anxious to see this man. I suspect a hoaxis intended, but the instigators of it little knew whom theyhad to deal with. `They laugh best who laugh last!'"

　　Having delivered himself of this pompous address, utteredwith a degree of energy that left the baron almost out ofbreath, he bowed to the assembled party and withdrew to hisdrawing-room, whose sumptuous furnishings of white and goldhad caused a great sensation in the Chaussee d'Antin. It wasto this apartment he had desired his guest to be shown, withthe purpose of overwhelming him at the sight of so muchluxury. He found the count standing before some copies ofAlbano and Fattore that had been passed off to the banker asoriginals; but which, mere copies as they were, seemed tofeel their degradation in being brought into juxtapositionwith the gaudy colors that covered the ceiling. The countturned round as he heard the entrance of Danglars into theroom. With a slight inclination of the head, Danglars signedto the count to be seated, pointing significantly to agilded arm-chair, covered with white satin embroidered withgold. The count sat down. "I have the honor, I presume, ofaddressing M. de Monte Cristo."

　　The count bowed. "And I of speaking to Baron Danglars,chevalier of the Legion of Honor, and member of the Chamberof Deputies?"

　　Monte Cristo repeated all the titles he had read on thebaron's card.

　　Danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips. "You will,I trust, excuse me, monsieur, for not calling you by yourtitle when I first addressed you," he said, "but you areaware that we are living under a popular form of government,and that I am myself a representative of the liberties ofthe people."

　　"So much so," replied Monte Cristo, "that while you callyourself baron you are not willing to call anybody elsecount."

　　"Upon my word, monsieur," said Danglars with affectedcarelessness, "I attach no sort of value to such emptydistinctions; but the fact is, I was made baron, and alsochevalier of the Legion of Honor, in return for servicesrendered, but" --

　　"But you have discarded your titles after the example setyou by Messrs. de Montmorency and Lafayette? That was anoble example to follow, monsieur."

　　"Why," replied Danglars, "not entirely so; with theservants, -- you understand."

　　"I see; to your domestics you are `my lord,' the journalistsstyle you `monsieur,' while your constituents call you`citizen.' These are distinctions very suitable under aconstitutional government. I understand perfectly." AgainDanglars bit his lips; he saw that he was no match for MonteCristo in an argument of this sort, and he thereforehastened to turn to subjects more congenial.

　　"Permit me to inform you, Count," said he, bowing, "that Ihave received a letter of advice from Thomson & French, ofRome."

　　"I am glad to hear it, baron, -- for I must claim theprivilege of addressing you after the manner of yourservants. I have acquired the bad habit of calling personsby their titles from living in a country where barons arestill barons by right of birth. But as regards the letter ofadvice, I am charmed to find that it has reached you; thatwill spare me the troublesome and disagreeable task ofcoming to you for money myself. You have received a regularletter of advice?"

　　"Yes," said Danglars, "but I confess I didn't quitecomprehend its meaning."

　　"Indeed?"

　　"And for that reason I did myself the honor of calling uponyou, in order to beg for an explanation."

　　"Go on, monsieur. Here I am, ready to give you anyexplanation you desire."

　　"Why," said Danglers, "in the letter -- I believe I have itabout me" -- here he felt in his breast-pocket -- "yes, hereit is. Well, this letter gives the Count of Monte Cristounlimited credit on our house."

　　"Well, baron, what is there difficult to understand aboutthat?"

　　"Merely the term unlimited -- nothing else, certainly."

　　"Is not that word known in France? The people who wrote areAnglo-Germans, you know."

　　"Oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothingto be said; but as regards the competency of the document, Icertainly have doubts."

　　"Is it possible?" asked the count, assuming all air and toneof the utmost simplicity and candor. "Is it possible thatThomson & French are not looked upon as safe and solventbankers? Pray tell me what you think, baron, for I feeluneasy, I can assure you, having some considerable propertyin their hands."

　　"Thomson & French are perfectly solvent," replied Danglars,with an almost mocking smile: "but the word unlimited, infinancial affairs, is so extremely vague."

　　"Is, in fact, unlimited," said Monte Cristo.

　　"Precisely what I was about to say," cried Danglars. "Nowwhat is vague is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said,`when in doubt, keep out.'"

　　"Meaning to say," rejoined Monte Cristo, "that howeverThomson & French may be inclined to commit acts ofimprudence and folly, the Baron Danglars is not disposed tofollow their example."

　　"Not at all."

　　"Plainly enough. Messrs. Thomson & French set no bounds totheir engagements while those of M. Danglars have theirlimits; he is a wise man, according to his own showing."

　　"Monsieur," replied the banker, drawing himself up with ahaughty air, "the extent of my resources has never yet beenquestioned."

　　"It seems, then, reserved for me," said Monte Cristo coldly,"to be the first to do so."

　　"By what right, sir?"

　　"By right of the objections you have raised, and theexplanations you have demanded, which certainly must havesome motive."

　　Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time hehad been worsted, and this time on his own ground. Hisforced politeness sat awkwardly upon him, and approachedalmost to impertinence. Monte Cristo on the contrary,preserved a graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a certaindegree of simplicity he could assume at pleasure, and thuspossessed the advantage.

　　"Well, sir," resumed Danglars, after a brief silence, "Iwill endeavor to make myself understood, by requesting youto inform me for what sum you propose to draw upon me?"

　　"Why, truly," replied Monte Cristo, determined not to losean inch of the ground he had gained, "my reason for desiringan `unlimited' credit was precisely because I did not knowhow much money I might need."

　　The banker thought the time had come for him to take theupper hand. So throwing himself back in his arm-chair, hesaid, with an arrogant and purse-proud air, -- "Let me begof you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will thenbe convinced that the resources of the house of Danglars,however limited, are still equal to meeting the largestdemands; and were you even to require a million" --

　　"I beg your pardon," interposed Monte Cristo.

　　"I said a million," replied Danglars, with the confidence ofignorance.

　　"But could I do with a million?" retorted the count. "Mydear sir, if a trifle like that could suffice me, I shouldnever have given myself the trouble of opening an account. Amillion? Excuse my smiling when you speak of a sum I am inthe habit of carrying in my pocket-book or dressing-case."And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket asmall case containing his visiting-cards, and drew forth twoorders on the treasury for 500,000 francs each, payable atsight to the bearer. A man like Danglars was whollyinaccessible to any gentler method of correction. The effectof the present revelation was stunning; he trembled and wason the verge of apoplexy. The pupils of his eyes, as hegazed at Monte Cristo dilated horribly.

　　"Come, come," said Monte Cristo, "confess honestly that youhave not perfect confidence in Thomson & French. Iunderstand, and foreseeing that such might be the case, Itook, in spite of my ignorance of affairs, certainprecautions. See, here are two similar letters to that youhave yourself received; one from the house of Arstein &Eskeles of Vienna, to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn byBaring of London, upon M. Laffitte. Now, sir, you have butto say the word, and I will spare you all uneasiness bypresenting my letter of credit to one or other of these twofirms." The blow had struck home, and Danglars was entirelyvanquished; with a trembling hand he took the two lettersfrom the count, who held them carelessly between finger andthumb, and proceeded to scrutinize the signatures, with aminuteness that the count might have regarded as insulting,had it not suited his present purpose to mislead the banker."Oh, sir," said Danglars, after he had convinced himself ofthe authenticity of the documents he held, and rising as ifto salute the power of gold personified in the man beforehim, -- "three letters of unlimited credit! I can be nolonger mistrustful, but you must pardon me, my dear count,for confessing to some degree of astonishment."

　　"Nay," answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly air,"'tis not for such trifling sums as these that your bankinghouse is to be incommoded. Then, you can let me have somemoney, can you not?"

　　"Whatever you say, my dear count; I am at your orders."

　　"Why," replied Monte Cristo, "since we mutually understandeach other -- for such I presume is the case?" Danglarsbowed assentingly. "You are quite sure that not a lurkingdoubt or suspicion lingers in your mind?"

　　"Oh, my dear count," exclaimed Danglars, "I never for aninstant entertained such a feeling towards you."

　　"No, you merely wished to be convinced, nothing more; butnow that we have come to so clear an understanding, and thatall distrust and suspicion are laid at rest, we may as wellfix a sum as the probable expenditure of the first year,suppose we say six millions to" --

　　"Six millions!" gasped Danglars -- "so be it."

　　"Then, if I should require more," continued Monte Cristo ina careless manner, "why, of course, I should draw upon you;but my present intention is not to remain in France morethan a year, and during that period I scarcely think I shallexceed the sum I mentioned. However, we shall see. Be kindenough, then, to send me 500,000 francs to-morrow. I shallbe at home till midday, or if not, I will leave a receiptwith my steward."

　　"The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o'clockto-morrow morning, my dear count," replied Danglars. "Howwould you like to have it? in gold, silver, or notes?"

　　"Half in gold, and the other half in bank-notes, if youplease," said the count, rising from his seat.

　　"I must confess to you, count," said Danglars, "that I havehitherto imagined myself acquainted with the degree of allthe great fortunes of Europe, and still wealth such as yourshas been wholly unknown to me. May I presume to ask whetheryou have long possessed it?"

　　"It has been in the family a very long while," returnedMonte Cristo, "a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to betouched for a certain period of years, during which theaccumulated interest has doubled the capital. The periodappointed by the testator for the disposal of these richesoccurred only a short time ago, and they have only beenemployed by me within the last few years. Your ignorance onthe subject, therefore, is easily accounted for. However,you will be better informed as to me and my possessions erelong." And the count, while pronouncing these latter words,accompanied them with one of those ghastly smiles that usedto strike terror into poor Franz d'Epinay.

　　"With your tastes, and means of gratifying them," continuedDanglars, "you will exhibit a splendor that must effectuallyput us poor miserable millionaires quite in the shade. If Imistake not you are an admirer of paintings, at least Ijudged so from the attention you appeared to be bestowing onmine when I entered the room. If you will permit me, I shallbe happy to show you my picture gallery, composed entirelyof works by the ancient masters -- warranted as such. Not amodern picture among them. I cannot endure the modern schoolof painting."

　　"You are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this onegreat fault -- that they have not yet had time to becomeold."

　　"Or will you allow me to show you several fine statues byThorwaldsen, Bartoloni, and Canova? -- all foreign artists,for, as you may perceive, I think but very indifferently ofour French sculptors."

　　"You have a right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they areyour compatriots."

　　"But all this may come later, when we shall be better knownto each other. For the present, I will confine myself (ifperfectly agreeable to you) to introducing you to theBaroness Danglars -- excuse my impatience, my dear count,but a client like you is almost like a member of thefamily." Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted theproffered honor; Danglars rang and was answered by a servantin a showy livery. "Is the baroness at home?" inquiredDanglars.

　　"Yes, my lord," answered the man.

　　"And alone?"

　　"No, my lord, madame has visitors."

　　"Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be withmadame, or do you desire to preserve a strict incognito?"

　　"No, indeed," replied Monte Cristo with a smile, "I do notarrogate to myself the right of so doing."

　　"And who is with madame? -- M. Debray?" inquired Danglars,with an air of indulgence and good-nature that made MonteCristo smile, acquainted as he was with the secrets of thebanker's domestic life.

　　"Yes, my lord," replied the servant, "M. Debray is withmadame." Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to MonteCristo, said, "M. Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours,and private secretary to the Minister of the Interior. Asfor my wife, I must tell you, she lowered herself bymarrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancientfamilies in France. Her maiden name was De Servieres, andher first husband was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne."

　　"I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I havealready met M. Lucien Debray."

　　"Ah, indeed?" said Danglars; "and where was that?"

　　"At the house of M. de Morcerf."

　　"Ah, ha, you are acquainted with the young viscount, areyou?"

　　"We were together a good deal during the Carnival at Rome."

　　"True, true," cried Danglars. "Let me see; have I not heardtalk of some strange adventure with bandits or thieves hidin ruins, and of his having had a miraculous escape? Iforget how, but I know he used to amuse my wife and daughterby telling them about it after his return from Italy."

　　"Her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen," saidthe servant, who had gone to inquire the pleasure of hismistress. "With your permission," said Danglars, bowing, "Iwill precede you, to show you the way."

　　"By all means," replied Monte Cristo; "I follow you."

　　Chapter 47The Dappled Grays.

　　The baron, followed by the count, traversed a long series ofapartments, in which the prevailing characteristics wereheavy magnificence and the gaudiness of ostentatious wealth,until he reached the boudoir of Madame Danglars -- a smalloctagonal-shaped room, hung with pink satin, covered withwhite Indian muslin. The chairs were of ancient workmanshipand materials; over the doors were painted sketches ofshepherds and shepherdesses, after the style and manner ofBoucher; and at each side pretty medallions in crayons,harmonizing well with the furnishings of this charmingapartment, the only one throughout the great mansion inwhich any distinctive taste prevailed. The truth was, it hadbeen entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followedout by M. Danglars and his architect, who had been selectedto aid the baron in the great work of improvement solelybecause he was the most fashionable and celebrated decoratorof the day. The decorations of the boudoir had then beenleft entirely to Madame Danglars and Lucien Debray. M.Danglars, however, while possessing a great admiration forthe antique, as it was understood during the time of theDirectory, entertained the most sovereign contempt for thesimple elegance of his wife's favorite sitting-room, where,by the way, he was never permitted to intrude, unless,indeed, he excused his own appearance by ushering in somemore agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he hadrather the air and manner of a person who was himselfintroduced, than that of being the presenter of another, hisreception being cordial or frigid, in proportion as theperson who accompanied him chanced to please or displeasethe baroness.

　　Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom ofyouth, was still strikingly handsome) was now seated at thepiano, a most elaborate piece of cabinet and inlaid work,while Lucien Debray, standing before a small work-table, wasturning over the pages of an album. Lucien had found time,preparatory to the count's arrival, to relate manyparticulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will beremembered that Monte Cristo had made a lively impression onthe minds of all the party assembled at the breakfast givenby Albert de Morcerf; and although Debray was not in thehabit of yielding to such feelings, he had never been ableto shake off the powerful influence excited in his mind bythe impressive look and manner of the count, consequentlythe description given by Lucien to the baroness bore thehighly-colored tinge of his own heated imagination. Alreadyexcited by the wonderful stories related of the count by DeMorcerf, it is no wonder that Madame Danglars eagerlylistened to, and fully credited, all the additionalcircumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the pianoand over the album was only a little ruse adopted by way ofprecaution. A most gracious welcome and unusual smile werebestowed on M. Danglars; the count, in return for hisgentlemanly bow, received a formal though graceful courtesy,while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of distantrecognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.

　　"Baroness," said Danglars, "give me leave to present to youthe Count of Monte Cristo, who has been most warmlyrecommended to me by my correspondents at Rome. I need butmention one fact to make all the ladies in Paris court hisnotice, and that is, that he has come to take up his abodein Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposesto spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners,and lawn parties without end, in all of which I trust thecount will remember us, as he may depend upon it we shallhim, in our own humble entertainments." In spite of thegross flattery and coarseness of this address, MadameDanglars could not forbear gazing with considerable intereston a man capable of expending six millions in twelve months,and who had selected Paris for the scene of his princelyextravagance. "And when did you arrive here?" inquired she.

　　"Yesterday morning, madame."

　　"Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of theglobe? Pardon me -- at least, such I have heard is yourcustom."

　　"Nay, madame. This time I have merely come from Cadiz."

　　"You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your firstvisit. Paris is a horrible place in summer. Balls, parties,and fetes are over; the Italian opera is in London; theFrench opera everywhere except in Paris. As for the TheatreFrancais, you know, of course, that it is nowhere. The onlyamusements left us are the indifferent races at the Champ deMars and Satory. Do you propose entering any horses ateither of these races, count?"

　　"I shall do whatever they do at Paris, madame, if I have thegood fortune to find some one who will initiate me into theprevalent ideas of amusement."

　　"Are you fond of horses, count?"

　　"I have passed a considerable part of my life in the East,madame, and you are doubtless aware that the Orientals valueonly two things -- the fine breeding of their horses and thebeauty of their women."

　　"Nay, count," said the baroness, "it would have beensomewhat more gallant to have placed the ladies first."

　　"You see, madame, how rightly I spoke when I said I requireda preceptor to guide me in all my sayings and doings here."At this instant the favorite attendant of Madame Danglarsentered the boudoir; approaching her mistress, she spokesome words in an undertone. Madame Danglars turned verypale, then exclaimed, -- "I cannot believe it; the thing isimpossible."

　　"I assure you, madame," replied the woman, "it is as I havesaid." Turning impatiently towards her husband, MadameDanglars demanded, "Is this true?"

　　"Is what true, madame?" inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.

　　"What my maid tells me."

　　"But what does she tell you?"

　　"That when my coachman was about to harness the horses to mycarriage, he discovered that they had been removed from thestables without his knowledge. I desire to know what is themeaning of this?"

　　"Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me," said Danglars.

　　"Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious tohear what explanation you will give. These two gentlemenshall decide between us; but, first, I will state the caseto them. Gentlemen," continued the baroness, "among the tenhorses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are two that belongexclusively to me -- a pair of the handsomest and mostspirited creatures to be found in Paris. But to you, atleast, M. Debray, I need not give a further description,because to you my beautiful pair of dappled grays were wellknown. Well, I had promised Madame de Villefort the loan ofmy carriage to drive to-morrow to the Bois; but when mycoachman goes to fetch the grays from the stables they aregone -- positively gone. No doubt M. Danglars has sacrificedthem to the selfish consideration of gaining some thousandsof paltry francs. Oh, what a detestable crew they are, thesemercenary speculators!"

　　"Madame," replied Danglars, "the horses were notsufficiently quiet for you; they were scarcely four yearsold, and they made me extremely uneasy on your account."

　　"Nonsense," retorted the baroness; "you could not haveentertained any alarm on the subject, because you areperfectly well aware that I have had for a month in myservice the very best coachman in Paris. But, perhaps, youhave disposed of the coachman as well as the horses?"

　　"My dear love, pray do not say any more about them, and Ipromise you another pair exactly like them in appearance,only more quiet and steady." The baroness shrugged hershoulders with an air of ineffable contempt, while herhusband, affecting not to observe this unconjugal gesture,turned towards Monte Cristo and said, -- "Upon my word,count, I am quite sorry not to have met you sooner. You aresetting up an establishment, of course?"

　　"Why, yes," replied the count.

　　"I should have liked to have made you the offer of thesehorses. I have almost given them away, as it is; but, as Ibefore said, I was anxious to get rid of them upon anyterms. They were only fit for a young man."

　　"I am much obliged by your kind intentions towards me," saidMonte Cristo; "but this morning I purchased a very excellentpair of carriage-horses, and I do not think they were dear.There they are. Come, M. Debray, you are a connoisseur, Ibelieve, let me have your opinion upon them." As Debraywalked towards the window, Danglars approached his wife. "Icould not tell you before others," said he in a low tone,"the reason of my parting with the horses; but a mostenormous price was offered me this morning for them. Somemadman or fool, bent upon ruining himself as fast as he can,actually sent his steward to me to purchase them at anycost; and the fact is, I have gained 16,000 francs by thesale of them. Come, don't look so angry, and you shall have4,000 francs of the money to do what you like with, andEugenie shall have 2,000. There, what do you think now ofthe affair? Wasn't I right to part with the horses?" MadameDanglars surveyed her husband with a look of witheringcontempt.

　　"Great heavens?" suddenly exclaimed Debray.

　　"What is it?" asked the baroness.

　　"I cannot be mistaken; there are your horses! The veryanimals we were speaking of, harnessed to the count'scarriage!"

　　"My dappled grays?" demanded the baroness, springing to thewindow. "'Tis indeed they!" said she. Danglars lookedabsolutely stupefied. "How very singular," cried MonteCristo with well-feigned astonishment.

　　"I cannot believe it," murmured the banker. Madame Danglarswhispered a few words in the ear of Debray, who approachedMonte Cristo, saying, "The baroness wishes to know what youpaid her husband for the horses."

　　"I scarcely know," replied the count; "it was a littlesurprise prepared for me by my steward, and cost me -- well,somewhere about 30,000 francs." Debray conveyed the count'sreply to the baroness. Poor Danglars looked so crest-fallenand discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a pitying airtowards him. "See," said the count, "how very ungratefulwomen are. Your kind attention, in providing for the safetyof the baroness by disposing of the horses, does not seem tohave made the least impression on her. But so it is; a womanwill often, from mere wilfulness, prefer that which isdangerous to that which is safe. Therefore, in my opinion,my dear baron, the best and easiest way is to leave them totheir fancies, and allow them to act as they please, andthen, if any mischief follows, why, at least, they have noone to blame but themselves." Danglars made no reply; he wasoccupied in anticipations of the coming scene betweenhimself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that ofOlympic Jove, predicted a storm. Debray, who perceived thegathering clouds, and felt no desire to witness theexplosion of Madame Danglars' rage, suddenly recollected anappointment, which compelled him to take his leave; whileMonte Cristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to destroythe advantages he hoped to obtain, made a farewell bow anddeparted, leaving Danglars to endure the angry reproaches ofhis wife.

　　"Excellent," murmured Monte Cristo to himself, as he cameaway. "All his gone according to my wishes. The domesticpeace of this family is henceforth in my hands. Now, then,to play another master-stroke, by which I shall gain theheart of both husband and wife -- delightful! Still," addedhe, "amid all this, I have not yet been presented toMademoiselle Eugenie Danglars, whose acquaintance I shouldhave been glad to make. But," he went on with his peculiarsmile, "I am here in Paris, and have plenty of time beforeme -- by and by will do for that." With these reflections heentered his carriage and returned home. Two hoursafterwards, Madame Danglars received a most flatteringepistle from the count, in which he entreated her to receiveback her favorite "dappled grays," protesting that he couldnot endure the idea of making his entry into the Parisianworld of fashion with the knowledge that his splendidequipage had been obtained at the price of a lovely woman'sregrets. The horses were sent back wearing the same harnessshe had seen on them in the morning; only, by the count'sorders, in the centre of each rosette that adorned eitherside of their heads, had been fastened a large diamond.

　　To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him toexcuse the whimsical gift of a capricious millionaire, andto beg the baroness to pardon the Eastern fashion adopted inthe return of the horses.

　　During the evening, Monte Cristo quitted Paris for Auteuil,accompanied by Ali. The following day, about three o'clock,a single blow struck on the gong summoned Ali to thepresence of the count. "Ali," observed his master, as theNubian entered the chamber, "you have frequently explainedto me how more than commonly skilful you are in throwing thelasso, have you not?" Ali drew himself up proudly, and thenreturned a sign in the affirmative. "I thought I did notmistake. With your lasso you could stop an ox?" Again Alirepeated his affirmative gesture. "Or a tiger?" Ali bowedhis head in token of assent. "A lion even?" Ali sprungforwards, imitating the action of one throwing the lasso,then of a strangled lion.

　　"I understand," said Monte Cristo; "you wish to tell me youhave hunted the lion?" Ali smiled with triumphant pride ashe signified that he had indeed both chased and capturedmany lions. "But do you believe you could arrest theprogress of two horses rushing forwards with ungovernablefury?" The Nubian smiled. "It is well," said Monte Cristo."Then listen to me. Ere long a carriage will dash past here,drawn by the pair of dappled gray horses you saw me withyesterday; now, at the risk of your own life, you mustmanage to stop those horses before my door."

　　Ali descended to the street, and marked a straight line onthe pavement immediately at the entrance of the house, andthen pointed out the line he had traced to the count, whowas watching him. The count patted him gently on theshoulder, his usual mode of praising Ali, who, pleased andgratified with the commission assigned him, walked calmlytowards a projecting stone forming the angle of the streetand house, and, seating himself thereon, began to smoke hischibouque, while Monte Cristo re-entered his dwelling,perfectly assured of the success of his plan. Still, as fiveo'clock approached, and the carriage was momentarilyexpected by the count, the indication of more than commonimpatience and uneasiness might be observed in his manner.He stationed himself in a room commanding a view of thestreet, pacing the chamber with restless steps, stoppingmerely to listen from time to time for the sound ofapproaching wheels, then to cast an anxious glance on Ali;but the regularity with which the Nubian puffed forth thesmoke of his chibouque proved that he at least was whollyabsorbed in the enjoyment of his favorite occupation.Suddenly a distant sound of rapidly advancing wheels washeard, and almost immediately a carriage appeared, drawn bya pair of wild, ungovernable horses, while the terrifiedcoachman strove in vain to restrain their furious speed.

　　In the vehicle was a young woman and a child of about sevenor eight clasped in each other's arms. Terror seemed to havedeprived them even of the power of uttering a cry. Thecarriage creaked and rattled as it flew over the roughstones, and the slightest obstacle under the wheels wouldhave caused disaster; but it kept on in the middle of theroad, and those who saw it pass uttered cries of terror.

　　Ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso fromhis pocket, threw it so skilfully as to catch the forelegsof the near horse in its triple fold, and suffered himselfto be dragged on for a few steps by the violence of theshock, then the animal fell over on the pole, which snapped,and therefore prevented the other horse from pursuing itsway. Gladly availing himself of this opportunity, thecoachman leaped from his box; but Ali had promptly seizedthe nostrils of the second horse, and held them in his irongrasp, till the beast, snorting with pain, sunk beside hiscompanion. All this was achieved in much less time than isoccupied in the recital. The brief space had, however, beensufficient for a man, followed by a number of servants, torush from the house before which the accident had occurred,and, as the coachman opened the door of the carriage, totake from it a lady who was convulsively grasping thecushions with one hand, while with the other she pressed toher bosom the young boy, who had lost consciousness.

　　Monte Cristo carried them both to the salon, and depositedthem on a sofa. "Compose yourself, madame," said he; "alldanger is over." The woman looked up at these words, and,with a glance far more expressive than any entreaties couldhave been, pointed to her child, who still continuedinsensible. "I understand the nature of your alarms,madame," said the count, carefully examining the child, "butI assure you there is not the slightest occasion foruneasiness; your little charge has not received the leastinjury; his insensibility is merely the effects of terror,and will soon pass."

　　"Are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize myfears? See how deadly pale he is! My child, my darlingEdward; speak to your mother -- open your dear eyes and lookon me once again! Oh, sir, in pity send for a physician; mywhole fortune shall not be thought too much for the recoveryof my boy."

　　With a calm smile and a gentle wave of the hand, MonteCristo signed to the distracted mother to lay aside herapprehensions; then, opening a casket that stood near, hedrew forth a phial of Bohemian glass incrusted with gold,containing a liquid of the color of blood, of which he letfall a single drop on the child's lips. Scarcely had itreached them, ere the boy, though still pale as marble,opened his eyes, and eagerly gazed around him. At this, thedelight of the mother was almost frantic. "Where am I?"exclaimed she; "and to whom am I indebted for so happy atermination to my late dreadful alarm?"

　　"Madame," answered the count, "you are under the roof of onewho esteems himself most fortunate in having been able tosave you from a further continuance of your sufferings."

　　"My wretched curiosity has brought all this about," pursuedthe lady. "All Paris rung with the praises of MadameDanglars' beautiful horses, and I had the folly to desire toknow whether they really merited the high praise given tothem."

　　"Is it possible," exclaimed the count with well-feignedastonishment, "that these horses belong to the baroness?"

　　"They do, indeed. May I inquire if you are acquainted withMadame Danglars?"

　　"I have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from thedanger that threatened you is redoubled by the consciousnessthat I have been the unwilling and the unintentional causeof all the peril you have incurred. I yesterday purchasedthese horses of the baron; but as the baroness evidentlyregretted parting with them, I ventured to send them back toher, with a request that she would gratify me by acceptingthem from my hands."

　　"You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, ofwhom Hermine has talked to me so much?"

　　"You have rightly guessed, madame," replied the count.

　　"And I am Madame Heloise de Villefort." The count bowed withthe air of a person who hears a name for the first time."How grateful will M. de Villefort be for all your goodness;how thankfully will he acknowledge that to you alone he owesthe existence of his wife and child! Most certainly, but forthe prompt assistance of your intrepid servant, this dearchild and myself must both have perished."

　　"Indeed, I still shudder at the fearful danger you wereplaced in."

　　"I trust you will allow me to recompense worthily thedevotion of your man."

　　"I beseech you, madame," replied Monte Cristo "not to spoilAli, either by too great praise or rewards. I cannot allowhim to acquire the habit of expecting to be recompensed forevery trifling service he may render. Ali is my slave, andin saving your life he was but discharging his duty to me."

　　"Nay," interposed Madame de Villefort, on whom theauthoritative style adopted by the count made a deepimpression, "nay, but consider that to preserve my life hehas risked his own."

　　"His life, madame, belongs not to him; it is mine, in returnfor my having myself saved him from death." Madame deVillefort made no further reply; her mind was utterlyabsorbed in the contemplation of the person who, from thefirst instant she saw him, had made so powerful animpression on her. During the evident preoccupation ofMadame de Villefort, Monte Cristo scrutinized the featuresand appearance of the boy she kept folded in her arms,lavishing on him the most tender endearments. The child wassmall for his age, and unnaturally pale. A mass of straightblack hair, defying all attempts to train or curl it, fellover his projecting forehead, and hung down to hisshoulders, giving increased vivacity to eyes alreadysparkling with a youthful love of mischief and fondness forevery forbidden enjoyment. His mouth was large, and thelips, which had not yet regained their color, wereparticularly thin; in fact, the deep and crafty look, givinga predominant expression to the child's face, belongedrather to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to one so young.His first movement was to free himself by a violent pushfrom the encircling arms of his mother, and to rush forwardto the casket from whence the count had taken the phial ofelixir; then, without asking permission of any one, heproceeded, in all the wilfulness of a spoiled childunaccustomed to restrain either whims or caprices, to pullthe corks out of all the bottles.

　　"Touch nothing, my little friend," cried the count eagerly;"some of those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, buteven to inhale."

　　Madame de Villefort became very pale, and, seizing her son'sarm, drew him anxiously toward her; but, once satisfied ofhis safety, she also cast a brief but expressive glance onthe casket, which was not lost upon the count. At thismoment Ali entered. At sight of him Madame de Villefortuttered an expression of pleasure, and, holding the childstill closer towards her, she said, "Edward, dearest, do yousee that good man? He has shown very great courage andresolution, for he exposed his own life to stop the horsesthat were running away with us, and would certainly havedashed the carriage to pieces. Thank him, then, my child, inyour very best manner; for, had he not come to our aid,neither you nor I would have been alive to speak ourthanks." The child stuck out his lips and turned away hishead in a disdainful manner, saying, "He's too ugly."

　　The count smiled as if the child bade fair to realize hishopes, while Madame de Villefort reprimanded her son with agentleness and moderation very far from conveying the leastidea of a fault having been committed. "This lady," said theCount, speaking to Ali in the Arabic language, "is desirousthat her son should thank you for saving both their lives;but the boy refuses, saying you are too ugly." Ali turnedhis intelligent countenance towards the boy, on whom hegazed without any apparent emotion; but the spasmodicworking of the nostrils showed to the practiced eye of MonteCristo that the Arab had been wounded to the heart.

　　"Will you permit me to inquire," said Madame de Villefort,as she arose to take her leave, "whether you usually residehere?"

　　"No, I do not," replied Monte Cristo; "it is a small place Ihave purchased quite lately. My place of abode is No. 30,Avenue des Champs Elysees; but I see you have quiterecovered from your fright, and are, no doubt, desirous ofreturning home. Anticipating your wishes, I have desired thesame horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages,and Ali, he whom you think so very ugly," continued he,addressing the boy with a smiling air, "will have the honorof driving you home, while your coachman remains here toattend to the necessary repairs of your calash. As soon asthat important business is concluded, I will have a pair ofmy own horses harnessed to convey it direct to MadameDanglars."

　　"I dare not return with those dreadful horses," said Madamede Villefort.

　　"You will see," replied Monte Cristo, "that they will be asdifferent as possible in the hands of Ali. With him theywill be gentle and docile as lambs." Ali had, indeed, givenproof of this; for, approaching the animals, who had beengot upon their legs with considerable difficulty, he rubbedtheir foreheads and nostrils with a sponge soaked inaromatic vinegar, and wiped off the sweat and foam thatcovered their mouths. Then, commencing a loud whistlingnoise, he rubbed them well all over their bodies for severalminutes; then, undisturbed by the noisy crowd collectedround the broken carriage, Ali quietly harnessed thepacified animals to the count's chariot, took the reins inhis hands, and mounted the box, when to the utterastonishment of those who had witnessed the ungovernablespirit and maddened speed of the same horses, he wasactually compelled to apply his whip in no very gentlemanner before he could induce them to start; and even thenall that could be obtained from the celebrated "dappledgrays," now changed into a couple of dull, sluggish, stupidbrutes, was a slow, pottering pace, kept up with so muchdifficulty that Madame de Villefort was more than two hoursreturning to her residence in the Faubourg St. Honore.

　　Scarcely had the first congratulations upon her marvellousescape been gone through when she wrote the following letterto Madame Danglars: --

　　Dear Hermine, -- I have just had a wonderful escape from themost imminent danger, and I owe my safety to the very Countof Monte Cristo we were talking about yesterday, but whom Ilittle expected to see to-day. I remember how unmercifully Ilaughed at what I considered your eulogistic and exaggeratedpraises of him; but I have now ample cause to admit thatyour enthusiastic description of this wonderful man fell farshort of his merits. Your horses got as far as Ranelagh,when they darted forward like mad things, and galloped awayat so fearful a rate, that there seemed no other prospectfor myself and my poor Edward but that of being dashed topieces against the first object that impeded their progress,when a strange-looking man, -- an Arab, a negro, or aNubian, at least a black of some nation or other -- at asignal from the count, whose domestic he is, suddenly seizedand stopped the infuriated animals, even at the risk ofbeing trampled to death himself; and certainly he must havehad a most wonderful escape. The count then hastened to us,and took us into his house, where he speedily recalled mypoor Edward to life. He sent us home in his own carriage.Yours will be returned to you to-morrow. You will find yourhorses in bad condition, from the results of this accident;they seem thoroughly stupefied, as if sulky and vexed athaving been conquered by man. The count, however, hiscommissioned me to assure you that two or three days' rest,with plenty of barley for their sole food during that time,will bring them back to as fine, that is as terrifying, acondition as they were in yesterday. Adieu! I cannot returnyou many thanks for the drive of yesterday; but, after all,I ought not to blame you for the misconduct of your horses,more especially as it procured me the pleasure of anintroduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, -- and certainlythat illustrious personage, apart from the millions he issaid to be so very anxious to dispose of, seemed to me oneof those curiously interesting problems I, for one, delightin solving at any risk, even if it were to necessitateanother drive to the Bois behind your horses. Edward enduredthe accident with miraculous courage -- he did not utter asingle cry, but fell lifeless into my arms; nor did a tearfall from his eyes after it was over. I doubt not you willconsider these praises the result of blind maternalaffection, but there is a soul of iron in that delicate,fragile body. Valentine sends many affectionate remembrancesto your dear Eugenie. I embrace you with all my heart.

　　Heloise de Villefort.

　　P.S. -- Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the Countof Monte Cristo at your house. I must and will see himagain. I have just made M. de Villefort promise to call onhim, and I hope the visit will be returned.

　　That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked ofeverywhere. Albert related it to his mother; Chateau-Renaud

　　recounted it at the Jockey Club, and Debray detailed it atlength in the salons of the minister; even Beauchampaccorded twenty lines in his journal to the relation of thecount's courage and gallantry, thereby celebrating him asthe greatest hero of the day in the eyes of all the femininemembers of the aristocracy. Vast was the crowd of visitorsand inquiring friends who left their names at the residenceof Madame de Villefort, with the design of renewing theirvisit at the right moment, of hearing from her lips all theinteresting circumstances of this most romantic adventure.As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions ofHeloise to the letter, -- donned his dress suit, drew on apair of white gloves, ordered the servants to attend thecarriage dressed in their full livery, and drove that samenight to No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Elysees.

　　Chapter 48Ideology.

　　If the Count of Monte Cristo had been for a long timefamiliar with the ways of Parisian society, he would haveappreciated better the significance of the step which M. deVillefort had taken. Standing well at court, whether theking regnant was of the older or younger branch, whether thegovernment was doctrinaire liberal, or conservative; lookedupon by all as a man of talent, since those who have neverexperienced a political check are generally so regarded;hated by many, but warmly supported by others, without beingreally liked by anybody, M. de Villefort held a highposition in the magistracy, and maintained his eminence likea Harlay or a Mole. His drawing-room, under the regeneratinginfluence of a young wife and a daughter by his firstmarriage, scarcely eighteen, was still one of thewell-regulated Paris salons where the worship of traditionalcustoms and the observance of rigid etiquette were carefullymaintained. A freezing politeness, a strict fidelity togovernment principles, a profound contempt for theories andtheorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality, -- these werethe elements of private and public life displayed by M. deVillefort.

　　He was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist.His relations with the former court, of which he alwaysspoke with dignity and respect, made him respected by thenew one, and he knew so many things, that not only was healways carefully considered, but sometimes consulted.Perhaps this would not have been so had it been possible toget rid of M. de Villefort; but, like the feudal barons whorebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt in an impregnablefortress. This fortress was his post as king's attorney, allthe advantages of which he exploited with marvellous skill,and which he would not have resigned but to be made deputy,and thus to replace neutrality by opposition. Ordinarily M.de Villefort made and returned very few visits. His wifevisited for him, and this was the received thing in theworld, where the weighty and multifarious occupations of themagistrate were accepted as an excuse for what was reallyonly calculated pride, a manifestation of professedsuperiority -- in fact, the application of the axiom,"Pretend to think well of yourself, and the world will thinkwell of you," an axiom a hundred times more useful insociety nowadays than that of the Greeks, "Know thyself," aknowledge for which, in our days, we have substituted theless difficult and more advantageous science of knowingothers.

　　To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; tohis enemies, he was a silent, but bitter opponent; for thosewho were neither the one nor the other, he was a statue ofthe law-made man. He had a haughty bearing, a look eithersteady and impenetrable or insolently piercing andinquisitorial. Four successive revolutions had built andcemented the pedestal upon which his fortune was based. M.de Villefort had the reputation of being the least curiousand the least wearisome man in France. He gave a ball everyyear, at which he appeared for a quarter of an hour only, --that is to say, five and forty minutes less than the king isvisible at his balls. He was never seen at the theatres, atconcerts, or in any place of public resort. Occasionally,but seldom, he played at whist, and then care was taken toselect partners worthy of him -- sometimes they wereambassadors, sometimes archbishops, or sometimes a prince,or a president, or some dowager duchess. Such was the manwhose carriage had just now stopped before the Count ofMonte Cristo's door. The valet de chambre announced M. deVillefort at the moment when the count, leaning over a largetable, was tracing on a map the route from St. Petersburg toChina.

　　The procureur entered with the same grave and measured stephe would have employed in entering a court of justice. Hewas the same man, or rather the development of the same man,whom we have heretofore seen as assistant attorney atMarseilles. Nature, according to her way, had made nodeviation in the path he had marked out for himself. Frombeing slender he had now become meagre; once pale, he wasnow yellow; his deep-set eyes were hollow, and the goldspectacles shielding his eyes seemed to be an integralportion of his face. He dressed entirely in black, with theexception of his white tie, and his funeral appearance wasonly mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passedalmost imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appearedlike a streak of blood traced with a delicate brush.Although master of himself, Monte Cristo, scrutinized withirrepressible curiosity the magistrate whose salute hereturned, and who, distrustful by habit, and especiallyincredulous as to social prodigies, was much more dispisedto look upon "the noble stranger," as Monte Cristo wasalready called, as an adventurer in search of new fields, oran escaped criminal, rather than as a prince of the HolySee, or a sultan of the Thousand and One Nights.

　　"Sir," said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed bymagistrates in their oratorical periods, and of which theycannot, or will not, divest themselves in society, "sir, thesignal service which you yesterday rendered to my wife andson has made it a duty for me to offer you my thanks. I havecome, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express toyou my overwhelming gratitude." And as he said this, the"eye severe" of the magistrate had lost nothing of itshabitual arrogance. He spoke in a voice of theprocureur-general, with the rigid inflexibility of neck andshoulders which caused his flatterers to say (as we havebefore observed) that he was the living statue of the law.

　　"Monsieur," replied the count, with a chilling air, "I amvery happy to have been the means of preserving a son to hismother, for they say that the sentiment of maternity is themost holy of all; and the good fortune which occurred to me,monsieur, might have enabled you to dispense with a dutywhich, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly great honor;for I am aware that M. de Villefort is not usually lavish ofthe favor which he now bestows on me, -- a favor which,however estimable, is unequal to the satisfaction which Ihave in my own consciousness." Villefort, astonished at thisreply, which he by no means expected, started like a soldierwho feels the blow levelled at him over the armor he wears,and a curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from thatmoment he noted in the tablets of his brain that the Countof Monte Cristo was by no means a highly bred gentleman. Heglanced around. in order to seize on something on which theconversation might turn, and seemed to fall easily on atopic. He saw the map which Monte Cristo had been examiningwhen he entered, and said, "You seem geographically engaged,sir? It is a rich study for you, who, as I learn, have seenas many lands as are delineated on this map."

　　"Yes, sir," replied the count; "l have sought to make of thehuman race, taken in the mass, what you practice every dayon individuals -- a physiological study. I have believed itwas much easier to descend from the whole to a part than toascend from a part to the whole. It is an algebraic axiom,which makes us proceed from a known to an unknown quantity,and not from an unknown to a known; but sit down, sir, I begof you."

　　Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur wasobliged to take the trouble to move forwards himself, whilethe count merely fell back into his own, on which he hadbeen kneeling when M. Villefort entered. Thus the count washalfway turned towards his visitor, having his back towardsthe window, his elbow resting on the geographical chartwhich furnished the theme of conversation for the moment, --a conversation which assumed, as in the case of theinterviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a turn analogous tothe persons, if not to the situation. "Ah, youphilosophize," replied Villefort, after a moment's silence,during which, like a wrestler who encounters a powerfulopponent, he took breath; "well, sir, really, if, like you,I had nothing else to do, I should seek a more amusingoccupation."

　　"Why, in truth, sir," was Monte Cristo's reply, "man is butan ugly caterpillar for him who studies him through a solarmicroscope; but you said, I think, that I had nothing elseto do. Now, really, let me ask, sir, have you? -- do youbelieve you have anything to do? or to speak in plain terms,do you really think that what you do deserves being calledanything?"

　　Villefort's astonishment redoubled at this second thrust soforcibly made by his strange adversary. It was a long timesince the magistrate had heard a paradox so strong, orrather, to say the truth more exactly, it was the first timehe had ever heard of it. The procureur exerted himself toreply. "Sir," he responded, "you are a stranger, and Ibelieve you say yourself that a portion of your life hasbeen spent in Oriental countries, so you are not aware howhuman justice, so expeditions in barbarous countries, takeswith us a prudent and well-studied course."

　　"Oh, yes -- yes, I do, sir; it is the pede claudo of theancients. I know all that, for it is with the justice of allcountries especially that I have occupied myself -- it iswith the criminal procedure of all nations that I havecompared natural justice, and I must say, sir, that it isthe law of primitive nations, that is, the law ofretaliation, that I have most frequently found to beaccording to the law of God."

　　"If this law were adopted, sir," said the procureur, "itwould greatly simplify our legal codes, and in that case themagistrates would not (as you just observed) have much todo."

　　"It may, perhaps, come to this in time," observed MonteCristo; "you know that human inventions march from thecomplex to the simple, and simplicity is always perfection."

　　"In the meanwhile," continued the magistrate, "our codes arein full force, with all their contradictory enactmentsderived from Gallic customs, Roman laws, and Frank usages;the knowledge of all which, you will agree, is not to beacquired without extended labor; it needs tedious study toacquire this knowledge, and, when acquired, a strong powerof brain to retain it."

　　"I agree with you entirely, sir; but all that even you knowwith respect to the French code, I know, not only inreference to that code, but as regards the codes of allnations. The English, Turkish, Japanese, Hindu laws, are asfamiliar to me as the French laws, and thus I was right,when I said to you, that relatively (you know thateverything is relative, sir) -- that relatively to what Ihave done, you have very little to do; but that relativelyto all I have learned, you have yet a great deal to learn."

　　"But with what motive have you learned all this?" inquiredVillefort, in astonishment. Monte Cristo smiled. "Really,sir," he observed, "I see that in spite of the reputationwhich you have acquired as a superior man, you look ateverything from the material and vulgar view of society,beginning with man, and ending with man -- that is to say,in the most restricted, most narrow view which it ispossible for human understanding to embrace."

　　"Pray, sir, explain yourself," said Villefort, more and moreastonished, "I really do -- not -- understand you --perfectly."

　　"I say, sir, that with the eyes fixed on the socialorganization of nations, you see only the springs of themachine, and lose sight of the sublime workman who makesthem act; I say that you do not recognize before you andaround you any but those office-holders whose commissionshave been signed by a minister or king; and that the menwhom God has put above those office-holders, ministers, andkings, by giving them a mission to follow out, instead of apost to fill -- I say that they escape your narrow, limitedfield of observation. It is thus that human weakness fails,from its debilitated and imperfect organs. Tobias took theangel who restored him to light for an ordinary young man.The nations took Attila, who was doomed to destroy them, fora conqueror similar to other conquerors, and it wasnecessary for both to reveal their missions, that they mightbe known and acknowledged; one was compelled to say, `I amthe angel of the Lord'; and the other, `I am the hammer ofGod,' in order that the divine essence in both might berevealed."

　　"Then," said Villefort, more and more amazed, and reallysupposing he was speaking to a mystic or a madman, "youconsider yourself as one of those extraordinary beings whomyou have mentioned?"

　　"And why not?" said Monte Cristo coldly.

　　"Your pardon, sir," replied Villefort, quite astounded, "butyou will excuse me if, when I presented myself to you, I wasunaware that I should meet with a person whose knowledge andunderstanding so far surpass the usual knowledge andunderstanding of men. It is not usual with us corruptedwretches of civilization to find gentlemen like yourself,possessors, as you are, of immense fortune -- at least, soit is said -- and I beg you to observe that I do notinquire, I merely repeat; -- it is not usual, I say, forsuch privileged and wealthy beings to waste their time inspeculations on the state of society, in philosophicalreveries, intended at best to console those whom fate hasdisinherited from the goods of this world."

　　"Really, sir," retorted the count, "have you attained theeminent situation in which you are, without having admitted,or even without having met with exceptions? and do you neveruse your eyes, which must have acquired so much finesse andcertainty, to divine, at a glance, the kind of man by whomyou are confronted? Should not a magistrate be not merelythe best administrator of the law, but the most craftyexpounder of the chicanery of his profession, a steel probeto search hearts, a touchstone to try the gold which in eachsoul is mingled with more or less of alloy?"

　　"Sir," said Villefort, "upon my word, you overcome me. Ireally never heard a person speak as you do."

　　"Because you remain eternally encircled in a round ofgeneral conditions, and have never dared to raise your wingsinto those upper spheres which God has peopled withinvisible or exceptional beings."

　　"And you allow then, sir, that spheres exist, and that thesemarked and invisible beings mingle amongst us?"

　　"Why should they not? Can you see the air you breathe, andyet without which you could not for a moment exist?"

　　"Then we do not see those beings to whom you allude?"

　　"Yes, we do; you see them whenever God pleases to allow themto assume a material form. You touch them, come in contactwith them, speak to them, and they reply to you."

　　"Ah," said Villefort, smiling, "I confess I should like tobe warned when one of these beings is in contact with me."

　　"You have been served as you desire, monsieur, for you werewarned just now, and I now again warn you."

　　"Then you yourself are one of these marked beings?"

　　"Yes, monsieur, I believe so; for until now, no man hasfound himself in a position similar to mine. The dominionsof kings are limited either by mountains or rivers, or achange of manners, or an alteration of language. My kingdomis bounded only by the world, for I am not an Italian, or aFrenchman, or a Hindu, or an American, or a Spaniard -- I ama cosmopolite. No country can say it saw my birth. God aloneknows what country will see me die. I adopt all customs,speak all languages. You believe me to be a Frenchman, for Ispeak French with the same facility and purity as yourself.Well, Ali, my Nubian, believes me to be an Arab; Bertuccio,my steward, takes me for a Roman; Haidee, my slave, thinksme a Greek. You may, therefore, comprehend, that being of nocountry, asking no protection from any government,acknowledging no man as my brother, not one of the scruplesthat arrest the powerful, or the obstacles which paralyzethe weak, paralyzes or arrests me. I have only twoadversaries -- I will not say two conquerors, for withperseverance I subdue even them, -- they are time anddistance. There is a third, and the most terrible -- that ismy condition as a mortal being. This alone can stop me in myonward career, before I have attained the goal at which Iaim, for all the rest I have reduced to mathematical terms.What men call the chances of fate -- namely, ruin, change,circumstances -- I have fully anticipated, and if any ofthese should overtake me, yet it will not overwhelm me.Unless I die, I shall always be what I am, and therefore itis that I utter the things you have never heard, even fromthe mouths of kings -- for kings have need, and otherpersons have fear of you. For who is there who does not sayto himself, in a society as incongruously organized as ours,`Perhaps some day I shall have to do with the king'sattorney'?"

　　"But can you not say that, sir? The moment you become aninhabitant of France, you are naturally subjected to theFrench law."

　　"I know it sir," replied Monte Cristo; "but when I visit acountry I begin to study, by all the means which areavailable, the men from whom I may have anything to hope orto fear, till I know them as well as, perhaps better than,they know themselves. It follows from this, that the king'sattorney, be he who he may, with whom I should have to deal,would assuredly be more embarrassed than I should."

　　"That is to say," replied Villefort with hesitation, "thathuman nature being weak, every man, according to your creed,has committed faults."

　　"Faults or crimes," responded Monte Cristo with a negligentair.

　　"And that you alone, amongst the men whom you do notrecognize as your brothers -- for you have said so,"observed Villefort in a tone that faltered somewhat -- "youalone are perfect."

　　"No, not perfect," was the count's reply; "onlyimpenetrable, that's all. But let us leave off this strain,sir, if the tone of it is displeasing to you; I am no moredisturbed by your justice than are you by my second-sight."

　　"No, no, -- by no means," said Villefort, who was afraid ofseeming to abandon his ground. "No; by your brilliant andalmost sublime conversation you have elevated me above theordinary level; we no longer talk, we rise to dissertation.But you know how the theologians in their collegiate chairs,and philosophers in their controversies, occasionally saycruel truths; let us suppose for the moment that we aretheologizing in a social way, or even philosophically, and Iwill say to you, rude as it may seem, `My brother, yousacrifice greatly to pride; you may be above others, butabove you there is God.'"

　　"Above us all, sir," was Monte Cristo's response, in a toneand with an emphasis so deep that Villefort involuntarilyshuddered. "I have my pride for men -- serpents always readyto threaten every one who would pass without crushing themunder foot. But I lay aside that pride before God, who hastaken me from nothing to make me what I am."

　　"Then, count, I admire you," said Villefort, who, for thefirst time in this strange conversation, used thearistocratic form to the unknown personage, whom, until now,he had only called monsieur. "Yes, and I say to you, if youare really strong, really superior, really pious, orimpenetrable, which you were right in saying amounts to thesame thing -- then be proud, sir, for that is thecharacteristic of predominance. Yet you have unquestionablysome ambition."

　　"I have, sir."

　　"And what may it be?"

　　"I too, as happens to every man once in his life, have beentaken by Satan into the highest mountain in the earth, andwhen there he showed me all the kingdoms of the world, andas he said before, so said he to me, `Child of earth, whatwouldst thou have to make thee adore me?' I reflected long,for a gnawing ambition had long preyed upon me, and then Ireplied, `Listen, -- I have always heard of providence, andyet I have never seen him, or anything that resembles him,or which can make me believe that he exists. I wish to beprovidence myself, for I feel that the most beautiful,noblest, most sublime thing in the world, is to recompenseand punish.' Satan bowed his head, and groaned. `Youmistake,' he said, `providence does exist, only you havenever seen him, because the child of God is as invisible asthe parent. You have seen nothing that resembles him,because he works by secret springs, and moves by hiddenways. All I can do for you is to make you one of the agentsof that providence.' The bargain was concluded. I maysacrifice my soul, but what matters it?" added Monte Cristo."If the thing were to do again, I would again do it."Villefort looked at Monte Cristo with extreme amazement."Count," he inquired, "have you any relations?"

　　"No, sir, I am alone in the world."

　　"So much the worse."

　　"Why?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"Because then you might witness a spectacle calculated tobreak down your pride. You say you fear nothing but death?"

　　"I did not say that I feared it; I only said that deathalone could check the execution of my plans."

　　"And old age?"

　　"My end will be achieved before I grow old."

　　"And madness?"

　　"I have been nearly mad; and you know the axiom, -- non bisin idem. It is an axiom of criminal law, and, consequently,you understand its full application."

　　"Sir," continued Villefort, "there is something to fearbesides death, old age, and madness. For instance, there isapoplexy -- that lightning-stroke which strikes but does notdestroy you, and yet which brings everything to an end. Youare still yourself as now, and yet you are yourself nolonger; you who, like Ariel, verge on the angelic, are butan inert mass, which, like Caliban, verges on the brutal;and this is called in human tongues, as I tell you, neithermore nor less than apoplexy. Come, if so you will, count,and continue this conversation at my house, any day you maybe willing to see an adversary capable of understanding andanxious to refute you, and I will show you my father, M.Noirtier de Villefort, one of the most fiery Jacobins of theFrench Revolution; that is to say, he had the mostremarkable audacity, seconded by a most powerfulorganization -- a man who has not, perhaps, like yourselfseen all the kingdoms of the earth, but who has helped tooverturn one of the greatest; in fact, a man who believedhimself, like you, one of the envoys, not of God, but of asupreme being; not of providence, but of fate. Well, sir,the rupture of a blood-vessel on the lobe of the brain hasdestroyed all this, not in a day, not in an hour, but in asecond. M. Noirtier, who, on the previous night, was the oldJacobin, the old senator, the old Carbonaro, laughing at theguillotine, the cannon, and the dagger -- M. Noirtier,playing with revolutions -- M. Noirtier, for whom France wasa vast chess-board, from which pawns, rooks, knights, andqueens were to disappear, so that the king was checkmated --M. Noirtier, the redoubtable, was the next morning `poor M.Noirtier,' the helpless old man, at the tender mercies ofthe weakest creature in the household, that is, hisgrandchild, Valentine; a dumb and frozen carcass, in fact,living painlessly on, that time may be given for his frameto decompose without his consciousness of its decay."

　　"Alas, sir," said Monte Cristo "this spectacle is neitherstrange to my eye nor my thought. I am something of aphysician, and have, like my fellows, sought more than oncefor the soul in living and in dead matter; yet, likeprovidence, it has remained invisible to my eyes, althoughpresent to my heart. A hundred writers since Socrates,Seneca, St. Augustine, and Gall, have made, in verse andprose, the comparison you have made, and yet I can wellunderstand that a father's sufferings may effect greatchanges in the mind of a son. I will call on you, sir, sinceyou bid me contemplate, for the advantage of my pride, thisterrible spectacle, which must have been so great a sourceof sorrow to your family."

　　"It would have been so unquestionably, had not God given meso large a compensation. In contrast with the old man, whois dragging his way to the tomb, are two children justentering into life -- Valentine, the daughter by my firstwife -- Mademoiselle Renee de Saint-Meran -- and Edward, theboy whose life you have this day saved."

　　"And what is your deduction from this compensation, sir?"inquired Monte Cristo.

　　"My deduction is," replied Villefort, "that my father, ledaway by his passions, has committed some fault unknown tohuman justice, but marked by the justice of God. That God,desirous in his mercy to punish but one person, has visitedthis justice on him alone." Monte Cristo with a smile on hislips, uttered in the depths of his soul a groan which wouldhave made Villefort fly had he but heard it. "Adieu, sir,"said the magistrate, who had risen from his seat; "I leaveyou, bearing a remembrance of you -- a remembrance ofesteem, which I hope will not be disagreeable to you whenyou know me better; for I am not a man to bore my friends,as you will learn. Besides, you have made an eternal friendof Madame de Villefort." The count bowed, and contentedhimself with seeing Villefort to the door of his cabinet,the procureur being escorted to his carriage by two footmen,who, on a signal from their master, followed him with everymark of attention. When he had gone, Monte Cristo breathed aprofound sigh, and said, -- "Enough of this poison, let menow seek the antidote." Then sounding his bell, he said toAli, who entered, "I am going to madam's chamber -- have thecarriage ready at one o'clock."

　　Chapter 49Haidee.

　　It will be recollected that the new, or rather old,acquaintances of the Count of Monte Cristo, residing in theRue Meslay, were no other than Maximilian, Julie, andEmmanuel. The very anticipations of delight to be enjoyed inhis forthcoming visits -- the bright, pure gleam of heavenlyhappiness it diffused over the almost deadly warfare inwhich he had voluntarily engaged, illumined his wholecountenance with a look of ineffable joy and calmness, as,immediately after Villefort's departure, his thoughts flewback to the cheering prospect before him, of tasting, atleast, a brief respite from the fierce and stormy passionsof his mind. Even Ali, who had hastened to obey the Count'ssummons, went forth from his master's presence in charmedamazement at the unusual animation and pleasure depicted onfeatures ordinarily so stern and cold; while, as thoughdreading to put to flight the agreeable ideas hovering overhis patron's meditations, whatever they were, the faithfulNubian walked on tiptoe towards the door, holding hisbreath, lest its faintest sound should dissipate hismaster's happy reverie.

　　It was noon, and Monte Cristo had set apart one hour to bepassed in the apartments of Haidee, as though his oppressedspirit could not all at once admit the feeling of pure andunmixed joy, but required a gradual succession of calm andgentle emotions to prepare his mind to receive full andperfect happiness, in the same manner as ordinary naturesdemand to be inured by degrees to the reception of strong orviolent sensations. The young Greek, as we have alreadysaid, occupied apartments wholly unconnected with those ofthe count. The rooms had been fitted up in strict accordancewith Oriental ideas; the floors were covered with therichest carpets Turkey could produce; the walls hung withbrocaded silk of the most magnificent designs and texture;while around each chamber luxurious divans were placed, withpiles of soft and yielding cushions, that needed only to bearranged at the pleasure or convenience of such as soughtrepose. Haidee and three French maids, and one who was aGreek. The first three remained constantly in a smallwaiting-room, ready to obey the summons of a small goldenbell, or to receive the orders of the Romaic slave, who knewjust enough French to be able to transmit her mistress'swishes to the three other waiting-women; the latter hadreceived most peremptory instructions from Monte Cristo totreat Haidee with all the deference they would observe to aqueen.

　　The young girl herself generally passed her time in thechamber at the farther end of her apartments. This was asort of boudoir, circular, and lighted only from the roof,which consisted of rose-colored glass. Haidee was recliningupon soft downy cushions, covered with blue satin spottedwith silver; her head, supported by one of her exquisitelymoulded arms, rested on the divan immediately behind her,while the other was employed in adjusting to her lips thecoral tube of a rich narghile, through whose flexible pipeshe drew the smoke fragrant by its passage through perfumedwater. Her attitude, though perfectly natural for an Easternwoman would, in a European, have been deemed too full ofcoquettish straining after effect. Her dress, which was thatof the women of Epirus, consisted of a pair of white satintrousers, embroidered with pink roses, displaying feet soexquisitely formed and so delicately fair, that they mightwell have been taken for Parian marble, had not the eye beenundeceived by their movements as they constantly shifted inand out of a pair of little slippers with upturned toes,beautifully ornamented with gold and pearls. She wore a blueand white-striped vest, with long open sleeves, trimmed withsilver loops and buttons of pearls, and a sort of bodice,which, closing only from the centre to the waist, exhibitedthe whole of the ivory throat and upper part of the bosom;it was fastened with three magnificent diamond clasps. Thejunction of the bodice and drawers was entirely concealed byone of the many-colored scarfs, whose brilliant hues andrich silken fringe have rendered them so precious in theeyes of Parisian belles. Tilted on one side of her head shehad a small cap of gold-colored silk, embroidered withpearls; while on the other a purple rose mingled its glowingcolors with the luxuriant masses of her hair, of which theblackness was so intense that it was tinged with blue. Theextreme beauty of the countenance, that shone forth inloveliness that mocked the vain attempts of dress to augmentit, was peculiarly and purely Grecian; there were the large,dark, melting eyes, the finely formed nose, the coral lips,and pearly teeth, that belonged to her race and country.And, to complete the whole, Haidee was in the veryspringtide and fulness of youthful charms -- she had not yetnumbered more than twenty summers.

　　Monte Cristo summoned the Greek attendant, and bade herinquire whether it would be agreeable to her mistress toreceive his visit. Haidee's only reply was to direct herservant by a sign to withdraw the tapestried curtain thathung before the door of her boudoir, the framework of theopening thus made serving as a sort of border to thegraceful tableau presented by the young girl's picturesqueattitude and appearance. As Monte Cristo approached, sheleaned upon the elbow of the arm that held the narghile, andextending to him her other hand, said, with a smile ofcaptivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken bythe women of Athens and Sparta, "Why demand permission ereyou enter? Are you no longer my master, or have I ceased tobe your slave?" Monte Cristo returned her smile. "Haidee,"said he, "you well know."

　　"Why do you address me so coldly -- so distantly?" asked theyoung Greek. "Have I by any means displeased you? Oh, if so,punish me as you will; but do not -- do not speak to me intones and manner so formal and constrained."

　　"Haidee," replied the count, "you know that you are now inFrance, and are free."

　　"Free to do what?" asked the young girl.

　　"Free to leave me."

　　"Leave you? Why should I leave you?"

　　"That is not for me to say; but we are now about to mix insociety -- to visit and be visited."

　　"I don't wish to see anybody but you."

　　"And should you see one whom you could prefer, I would notbe so unjust" --

　　"I have never seen any one I preferred to you, and I havenever loved any one but you and my father."

　　"My poor child," replied Monte Cristo, "that is merelybecause your father and myself are the only men who haveever talked to you."

　　"I don't want anybody else to talk to me. My father said Iwas his `joy' -- you style me your `love,' -- and both ofyou have called me `my child.'"

　　"Do you remember your father, Haidee?" The young Greeksmiled. "He is here, and here," said she, touching her eyesand her heart. "And where am I?" inquired Monte Cristolaughingly.

　　"You?" cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, "youare everywhere!" Monte Cristo took the delicate hand of theyoung girl in his, and was about to raise it to his lips,when the simple child of nature hastily withdrew it, andpresented her cheek. "You now understand, Haidee," said thecount, "that from this moment you are absolutely free; thathere you exercise unlimited sway, and are at liberty to layaside or continue the costume of your country, as it maysuit your inclination. Within this mansion you are absolutemistress of your actions, and may go abroad or remain inyour apartments as may seem most agreeable to you. Acarriage waits your orders, and Ali and Myrtho willaccompany you whithersoever you desire to go. There is butone favor I would entreat of you."

　　"Speak."

　　"Guard carefully the secret of your birth. Make no allusionto the past; nor upon any occasion be induced to pronouncethe names of your illustrious father or ill-fated mother."

　　"I have already told you, my lord, that I shall see no one."

　　"It is possible, Haidee, that so perfect a seclusion, thoughconformable with the habits and customs of the East, may notbe practicable in Paris. Endeavor, then, to accustomyourself to our manner of living in these northern climes asyou did to those of Rome, Florence, Milan, and Madrid; itmay be useful to you one of these days, whether you remainhere or return to the East." The young girl raised hertearful eyes towards Monte Cristo as she said with touchingearnestness, "Whether we return to the East, you mean tosay, my lord, do you not?"

　　"My child," returned Monte Cristo "you know full well thatwhenever we part, it will be no fault or wish of mine; thetree forsakes not the flower -- the flower falls from thetree."

　　"My lord," replied Haidee, "I never will leave you, for I amsure I could not exist without you."

　　"My poor girl, in ten years I shall be old, and you will bestill young."

　　"My father had a long white beard, but I loved him; he wassixty years old, but to me he was handsomer than all thefine youths I saw."

　　"Then tell me, Haidee, do you believe you shall be able toaccustom yourself to our present mode of life?"

　　"Shall I see you?"

　　"Every day."

　　"Then what do you fear, my lord?"

　　"You might find it dull."

　　"No, my lord. In the morning, I shall rejoice in theprospect of your coming, and in the evening dwell withdelight on the happiness I have enjoyed in your presence;then too, when alone, I can call forth mighty pictures ofthe past, see vast horizons bounded only by the toweringmountains of Pindus and Olympus. Oh, believe me, that whenthree great passions, such as sorrow, love, and gratitudefill the heart, ennui can find no place."

　　"You are a worthy daughter of Epirus, Haidee, and yourcharming and poetical ideas prove well your descent fromthat race of goddesses who claim your country as theirbirthplace. Depend on my care to see that your youth is notblighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial solitude; andof this be well assured, that if you love me as a father, Ilove you as a child."

　　"You are wrong, my lord. The love I have for you is verydifferent from the love I had for my father. My father died,but I did not die. If you were to die, I should die too."The Count, with a smile of profound tenderness, extended hishand, and she carried it to her lips. Monte Cristo, thusattuned to the interview he proposed to hold with Morrel andhis family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines ofPindar, "Youth is a flower of which love is the fruit; happyis he who, after having watched its silent growth, ispermitted to gather and call it his own." The carriage wasprepared according to orders, and stepping lightly into it,the count drove off at his usual rapid pace.

　　Chapter 50The Morrel Family.

　　In a very few minutes the count reached No. 7 in the RueMeslay. The house was of white stone, and in a small courtbefore it were two small beds full of beautiful flowers. Inthe concierge that opened the gate the count recognizedCocles; but as he had but one eye, and that eye had becomesomewhat dim in the course of nine years, Cocles did notrecognize the count. The carriages that drove up to the doorwere compelled to turn, to avoid a fountain that played in abasin of rockwork, -- an ornament that had excited thejealousy of the whole quarter, and had gained for the placethe appellation of "The Little Versailles." It is needlessto add that there were gold and silver fish in the basin.The house, with kitchens and cellars below, had above theground-floor, two stories and attics. The whole of theproperty, consisting of an immense workshop, two pavilionsat the bottom of the garden, and the garden itself, had beenpurchased by Emmanuel, who had seen at a glance that hecould make of it a profitable speculation. He had reservedthe house and half the garden, and building a wall betweenthe garden and the workshops, had let them upon lease withthe pavilions at the bottom of the garden. So that for atrifling sum he was as well lodged, and as perfectly shutout from observation, as the inhabitants of the finestmansion in the Faubourg St. Germain. The breakfast-room wasfinished in oak; the salon in mahogany, and the furnishingswere of blue velvet; the bedroom was in citronwood and greendamask. There was a study for Emmanuel, who never studied,and a music-room for Julie, who never played. The whole ofthe second story was set apart for Maximilian; it wasprecisely similar to his sister's apartments, except thatfor the breakfast-parlor he had a billiard-room, where hereceived his friends. He was superintending the grooming ofhis horse, and smoking his cigar at the entrance of thegarden, when the count's carriage stopped at the gate.

　　Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from thebox, inquired whether Monsieur and Madame Herbault andMonsieur Maximilian Morrel would see his excellency theCount of Monte Cristo. "The Count of Monte Cristo?" criedMorrel, throwing away his cigar and hastening to thecarriage; "I should think we would see him. Ah, a thousandthanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise." Andthe young officer shook the count's hand so warmly, thatMonte Cristo could not be mistaken as to the sincerity ofhis joy, and he saw that he had been expected withimpatience, and was received with pleasure. "Come, come,"said Maximilian, "I will serve as your guide; such a man asyou are ought not to be introduced by a servant. My sisteris in the garden plucking the dead roses; my brother isreading his two papers, the Presse and the Debats, withinsix steps of her; for wherever you see Madame Herbault, youhave only to look within a circle of four yards and you willfind M. Emmanuel, and `reciprocally,' as they say at thePolytechnic School." At the sound of their steps a youngwoman of twenty to five and twenty, dressed in a silkmorning gown, and busily engaged in plucking the dead leavesoff a noisette rose-tree, raised her head. This was Julie,who had become, as the clerk of the house of Thomson &French had predicted, Madame Emmanuel Herbault. She uttereda cry of surprise at the sight of a stranger, and Maximilianbegan to laugh. "Don't disturb yourself, Julie," said he."The count has only been two or three days in Paris, but healready knows what a fashionable woman of the Marais is, andif he does not, you will show him."

　　"Ah, monsieur," returned Julie, "it is treason in my brotherto bring you thus, but he never has any regard for his poorsister. Penelon, Penelon!" An old man, who was diggingbusily at one of the beds, stuck his spade in the earth, andapproached, cap in hand, striving to conceal a quid oftobacco he had just thrust into his cheek. A few locks ofgray mingled with his hair, which was still thick andmatted, while his bronzed features and determined glancewell suited an old sailor who had braved the heat of theequator and the storms of the tropics. "I think you hailedme, Mademoiselle Julie?" said he. Penelon had stillpreserved the habit of calling his master's daughter"Mademoiselle Julie," and had never been able to change thename to Madame Herbault. "Penelon," replied Julie, "go andinform M. Emmanuel of this gentleman's visit, and Maximilianwill conduct him to the salon." Then, turning to MonteCristo, -- "I hope you will permit me to leave you for a fewminutes," continued she; and without awaiting any reply,disappeared behind a clump of trees, and escaped to thehouse by a lateral alley.

　　"I am sorry to see," observed Monte Cristo to Morrel, "thatI cause no small disturbance in your house."

　　"Look there," said Maximilian, laughing; "there is herhusband changing his jacket for a coat. I assure you, youare well known in the Rue Meslay."

　　"Your family appears to be a very happy one," said thecount, as if speaking to himself.

　　"Oh, yes, I assure you, count, they want nothing that canrender them happy; they are young and cheerful, they aretenderly attached to each other, and with twenty-fivethousand francs a year they fancy themselves as rich asRothschild."

　　"Five and twenty thousand francs is not a large sum,however," replied Monte Cristo, with a tone so sweet andgentle, that it went to Maximilian's heart like the voice ofa father; "but they will not be content with that. Yourbrother-in-law is a barrister? a doctor?"

　　"He was a merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to thebusiness of my poor father. M. Morrel, at his death, left500,000 francs, which were divided between my sister andmyself, for we were his only children. Her husband, who,when he married her, had no other patrimony than his nobleprobity, his first-rate ability, and his spotlessreputation, wished to possess as much as his wife. Helabored and toiled until he had amassed 250,000 francs; sixyears sufficed to achieve this object. Oh, I assure you,sir, it was a touching spectacle to see these youngcreatures, destined by their talents for higher stations,toiling together, and through their unwillingness to changeany of the customs of their paternal house, taking six yearsto accomplish what less scrupulous people would haveeffected in two or three. Marseilles resounded with theirwell-earned praises. At last, one day, Emmanuel came to hiswife, who had just finished making up the accounts. `Julie,'said he to her, `Cocles has just given me the last rouleauof a hundred francs; that completes the 250,000 francs wehad fixed as the limits of our gains. Can you contentyourself with the small fortune which we shall possess forthe future? Listen to me. Our house transacts business tothe amount of a million a year, from which we derive anincome of 40,000 francs. We can dispose of the business, ifwe please, in an hour, for I have received a letter from M.Delaunay, in which he offers to purchase the good-will ofthe house, to unite with his own, for 300,000 francs. Adviseme what I had better do.' -- `Emmanuel,' returned my sister,`the house of Morrel can only be carried on by a Morrel. Isit not worth 300,000 francs to save our father's name fromthe chances of evil fortune and failure?' -- `I thought so,'replied Emmanuel; `but I wished to have your advice.' --`This is my counsel: -- Our accounts are made up and ourbills paid; all we have to do is to stop the issue of anymore, and close our office.' This was done instantly. It wasthree o'clock; at a quarter past, a merchant presentedhimself to insure two ships; it was a clear profit of 15,000francs. `Monsieur,' said Emmanuel, `have the goodness toaddress yourself to M. Delaunay. We have quitted business.'-- `How long?' inquired the astonished merchant. `A quarterof an hour,' was the reply. And this is the reason,monsieur," continued Maximilian, "of my sister andbrother-in-law having only 25,000 francs a year."

　　Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which thecount's heart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel enteredwearing a hat and coat. He saluted the count with the air ofa man who is aware of the rank of his guest; then, afterhaving led Monte Cristo around the little garden, hereturned to the house. A large vase of Japan porcelain,filled with flowers that loaded the air with their perfume,stood in the salon. Julie, suitably dressed, and her hairarranged (she had accomplished this feat in less than tenminutes), received the count on his entrance. The songs ofthe birds were heard in an aviary hard by, and the branchesof laburnums and rose acacias formed an exquisite frameworkto the blue velvet curtains. Everything in this charmingretreat, from the warble of the birds to the smile of themistress, breathed tranquillity and repose. The count hadfelt the influence of this happiness from the moment heentered the house, and he remained silent and pensive,forgetting that he was expected to renew the conversation,which had ceased after the first salutations had beenexchanged. The silence became almost painful when, by aviolent effort, tearing himself from his pleasing reverie --"Madame," said he at length, "I pray you to excuse myemotion, which must astonish you who are only accustomed tothe happiness I meet here; but contentment is so new a sightto me, that I could never be weary of looking at yourselfand your husband."

　　"We are very happy, monsieur," replied Julie; "but we havealso known unhappiness, and few have ever undergone morebitter sufferings than ourselves." The Count's featuresdisplayed an expression of the most intense curiosity.

　　"Oh, all this is a family history, as Chateau-Renaud toldyou the other day," observed Maximilian. "This humblepicture would have but little interest for you, accustomedas you are to behold the pleasures and the misfortunes ofthe wealthy and industrious; but such as we are, we haveexperienced bitter sorrows."

　　"And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does intothose of all who are in affliction?" said Monte Cristoinquiringly.

　　"Yes, count," returned Julie, "we may indeed say he has, forhe has done for us what he grants only to his chosen; hesent us one of his angels." The count's cheeks becamescarlet, and he coughed, in order to have an excuse forputting his handkerchief to his mouth. "Those born towealth, and who have the means of gratifying every wish,"said Emmanuel, "know not what is the real happiness of life,just as those who have been tossed on the stormy waters ofthe ocean on a few frail planks can alone realize theblessings of fair weather."

　　Monte Cristo rose, and without making any answer (for thetremulousness of his voice would have betrayed his emotion)walked up and down the apartment with a slow step.

　　"Our magnificence makes you smile, count," said Maximilian,who had followed him with his eyes. "No, no," returned MonteCristo, pale as death, pressing one hand on his heart tostill its throbbings, while with the other he pointed to acrystal cover, beneath which a silken purse lay on a blackvelvet cushion. "I was wondering what could be thesignificance of this purse, with the paper at one end andthe large diamond at the other."

　　"Count," replied Maximilian, with an air of gravity, "thoseare our most precious family treasures."

　　"The stone seems very brilliant," answered the count.

　　"Oh, my brother does not allude to its value, although ithas been estimated at 100,000 francs; he means, that thearticles contained in this purse are the relics of the angelI spoke of just now."

　　"This I do not comprehend; and yet I may not ask for anexplanation, madame," replied Monte Cristo bowing. "Pardonme, I had no intention of committing an indiscretion."

　　"Indiscretion, -- oh, you make us happy by giving us anexcuse for expatiating on this subject. If we wanted toconceal the noble action this purse commemorates, we shouldnot expose it thus to view. Oh, would we could relate iteverywhere, and to every one, so that the emotion of ourunknown benefactor might reveal his presence."

　　"Ah, really," said Monte Cristo in a half-stifled voice.

　　"Monsieur," returned Maximilian, raising the glass cover,and respectfully kissing the silken purse, "this has touchedthe hand of a man who saved my father from suicide, us fromruin, and our name from shame and disgrace, -- a man bywhose matchless benevolence we poor children, doomed to wantand wretchedness, can at present hear every one envying ourhappy lot. This letter" (as he spoke, Maximilian drew aletter from the purse and gave it to the count) -- "thisletter was written by him the day that my father had taken adesperate resolution, and this diamond was given by thegenerous unknown to my sister as her dowry." Monte Cristoopened the letter, and read it with an indescribable feelingof delight. It was the letter written (as our readers know)to Julie, and signed "Sinbad the Sailor." "Unknown you say,is the man who rendered you this service -- unknown to you?"

　　"Yes; we have never had the happiness of pressing his hand,"continued Maximilian. "We have supplicated heaven in vain togrant us this favor, but the whole affair has had amysterious meaning that we cannot comprehend -- we have beenguided by an invisible hand, -- a hand as powerful as thatof an enchanter."

　　"Oh," cried Julie, "I have not lost all hope of some daykissing that hand, as I now kiss the purse which he hastouched. Four years ago, Penelon was at Trieste -- Penelon,count, is the old sailor you saw in the garden, and who,from quartermaster, has become gardener -- Penelon, when hewas at Trieste, saw on the quay an Englishman, who was onthe point of embarking on board a yacht, and he recognizedhim as the person who called on my father the fifth of June,1829, and who wrote me this letter on the fifth ofSeptember. He felt convinced of his identity, but he did notventure to address him."

　　"An Englishman," said Monte Cristo, who grew uneasy at theattention with which Julie looked at him. "An Englishman yousay?"

　　"Yes," replied Maximilian, "an Englishman, who representedhimself as the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson &French, at Rome. It was this that made me start when yousaid the other day, at M. de Morcerf's, that Messrs. Thomson& French were your bankers. That happened, as I told you, in1829. For God's sake, tell me, did you know thisEnglishman?"

　　"But you tell me, also, that the house of Thomson & Frenchhave constantly denied having rendered you this service?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then is it not probable that this Englishman may be someone who, grateful for a kindness your father had shown him,and which he himself had forgotten, has taken this method ofrequiting the obligation?"

　　"Everything is possible in this affair, even a miracle."

　　"What was his name?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"He gave no other name," answered Julie, looking earnestlyat the count, "than that at the end of his letter -- `Sinbadthe Sailor.'"

　　"Which is evidently not his real name, but a fictitiousone."

　　Then, noticing that Julie was struck with the sound of hisvoice, --

　　"Tell me," continued he, "was he not about my height,perhaps a little taller, with his chin imprisoned, as itwere, in a high cravat; his coat closely buttoned up, andconstantly taking out his pencil?"

　　"Oh, do you then know him?" cried Julie, whose eyes sparkledwith joy.

　　"No," returned Monte Cristo "I only guessed. I knew a LordWilmore, who was constantly doing actions of this kind."

　　"Without revealing himself?"

　　"He was an eccentric being, and did not believe in theexistence of gratitude."

　　"Oh, heaven," exclaimed Julie, clasping her hands, "in whatdid he believe, then?"

　　"He did not credit it at the period which I knew him," saidMonte Cristo, touched to the heart by the accents of Julie'svoice; "but, perhaps, since then he has had proofs thatgratitude does exist."

　　"And do you know this gentleman, monsieur?" inquiredEmmanuel.

　　"Oh, if you do know him," cried Julie, "can you tell uswhere he is -- where we can find him? Maximilian -- Emmanuel-- if we do but discover him, he must believe in thegratitude of the heart!" Monte Cristo felt tears start intohis eyes, and he again walked hastily up and down the room.

　　"In the name of heaven," said Maximilian, "if you knowanything of him, tell us what it is."

　　"Alas," cried Monte Cristo, striving to repress his emotion,"if Lord Wilmore was your unknown benefactor, I fear youwill never see him again. I parted from him two years ago atPalermo, and he was then on the point of setting out for themost remote regions; so that I fear he will never return."

　　"Oh, monsieur, this is cruel of you," said Julie, muchaffected; and the young lady's eyes swam with tears.

　　"Madame," replied Monte Cristo gravely, and gazing earnestlyon the two liquid pearls that trickled down Julie's cheeks,"had Lord Wilmore seen what I now see, he would becomeattached to life, for the tears you shed would reconcile himto mankind;" and he held out his hand to Julie, who gave himhers, carried away by the look and accent of the count."But," continued she, "Lord Wilmore had a family or friends,he must have known some one, can we not -- "

　　"Oh, it is useless to inquire," returned the count;"perhaps, after all, he was not the man you seek for. He wasmy friend: he had no secrets from me, and if this had beenso he would have confided in me."

　　"And he told you nothing?"

　　"Not a word."

　　"Nothing that would lead you to suppose?"

　　"Nothing."

　　"And yet you spoke of him at once."

　　"Ah, in such a case one supposes" --

　　"Sister, sister," said Maximilian, coming to the count'said, "monsieur is quite right. Recollect what our excellentfather so often told us, `It was no Englishman that thussaved us.'" Monte Cristo started. "What did your father tellyou, M. Morrel?" said he eagerly.

　　"My father thought that this action had been miraculouslyperformed -- he believed that a benefactor had arisen fromthe grave to save us. Oh, it was a touching superstition,monsieur, and although I did not myself believe it, I wouldnot for the world have destroyed my father's faith. Howoften did he muse over it and pronounce the name of a dearfriend -- a friend lost to him forever; and on hisdeath-bed, when the near approach of eternity seemed to haveillumined his mind with supernatural light, this thought,which had until then been but a doubt, became a conviction,and his last words were, `Maximilian, it was EdmondDantes!'" At these words the count's paleness, which had forsome time been increasing, became alarming; he could notspeak; he looked at his watch like a man who has forgottenthe hour, said a few hurried words to Madame Herbault, andpressing the hands of Emmanuel and Maximilian, -- "Madame,"said he, "I trust you will allow me to visit youoccasionally; I value your friendship, and feel grateful toyou for your welcome, for this is the first time for manyyears that I have thus yielded to my feelings;" and hehastily quitted the apartment.

　　"This Count of Monte Cristo is a strange man," saidEmmanuel.

　　"Yes," answered Maximilian, "but I feel sure he has anexcellent heart, and that he likes us."

　　"His voice went to my heart," observed Julie; "and two orthree times I fancied that I had heard it before."

　　Chapter 51Pyramus and Thisbe.

　　About two-thirds of the way along the Faubourg Saint-Honore,and in the rear of one of the most imposing mansions in thisrich neighborhood, where the various houses vie with eachother for elegance of design and magnificence ofconstruction, extended a large garden, where thewide-spreading chestnut-trees raised their heads high abovethe walls in a solid rampart, and with the coming of everyspring scattered a shower of delicate pink and whiteblossoms into the large stone vases that stood upon the twosquare pilasters of a curiously wrought iron gate, thatdated from the time of Louis XII. This noble entrance,however, in spite of its striking appearance and thegraceful effect of the geraniums planted in the two vases,as they waved their variegated leaves in the wind andcharmed the eye with their scarlet bloom, had fallen intoutter disuse. The proprietors of the mansion had many yearsbefore thought it best to confine themselves to thepossession of the house itself, with its thickly plantedcourt-yard, opening into the Faubourg Saint-Honore, and tothe garden shut in by this gate, which formerly communicatedwith a fine kitchen-garden of about an acre. For the demonof speculation drew a line, or in other words projected astreet, at the farther side of the kitchen-garden. Thestreet was laid out, a name was chosen and posted up on aniron plate, but before construction was begun, it occurredto the possessor of the property that a handsome sum mightbe obtained for the ground then devoted to fruits andvegetables, by building along the line of the proposedstreet, and so making it a branch of communication with theFaubourg Saint-Honore itself, one of the most importantthoroughfares in the city of Paris.

　　In matters of speculation, however, though "man proposes,""money disposes." From some such difficulty the newly namedstreet died almost in birth, and the purchaser of thekitchen-garden, having paid a high price for it, and beingquite unable to find any one willing to take his bargain offhis hands without a considerable loss, yet still clinging tothe belief that at some future day he should obtain a sumfor it that would repay him, not only for his past outlay,but also the interest upon the capital locked up in his newacquisition, contented himself with letting the groundtemporarily to some market-gardeners, at a yearly rental of500 francs. And so, as we have said, the iron gate leadinginto the kitchen-garden had been closed up and left to therust, which bade fair before long to eat off its hinges,while to prevent the ignoble glances of the diggers anddelvers of the ground from presuming to sully thearistocratic enclosure belonging to the mansion, the gatehad been boarded up to a height of six feet. True, theplanks were not so closely adjusted but that a hasty peepmight be obtained through their interstices; but the strictdecorum and rigid propriety of the inhabitants of the houseleft no grounds for apprehending that advantage would betaken of that circumstance.

　　Horticulture seemed, however, to have been abandoned in thedeserted kitchen-garden; and where cabbages, carrots,radishes, pease, and melons had once flourished, a scantycrop of lucerne alone bore evidence of its being deemedworthy of cultivation. A small, low door gave egress fromthe walled space we have been describing into the projectedstreet, the ground having been abandoned as unproductive byits various renters, and had now fallen so completely ingeneral estimation as to return not even the one-half percent it had originally paid. Towards the house thechestnut-trees we have before mentioned rose high above thewall, without in any way affecting the growth of otherluxuriant shrubs and flowers that eagerly dressed forward tofill up the vacant spaces, as though asserting their rightto enjoy the boon of light and air. At one corner, where thefoliage became so thick as almost to shut out day, a largestone bench and sundry rustic seats indicated that thissheltered spot was either in general favor or particular useby some inhabitant of the house, which was faintlydiscernible through the dense mass of verdure that partiallyconcealed it, though situated but a hundred paces off.

　　Whoever had selected this retired portion of the grounds asthe boundary of a walk, or as a place for meditation, wasabundantly justified in the choice by the absence of allglare, the cool, refreshing shade, the screen it affordedfrom the scorching rays of the sun, that found no entrancethere even during the burning days of hottest summer, theincessant and melodious warbling of birds, and the entireremoval from either the noise of the street or the bustle ofthe mansion. On the evening of one of the warmest daysspring had yet bestowed on the inhabitants of Paris, mightbe seen negligently thrown upon the stone bench, a book, aparasol, and a work-basket, from which hung a partlyembroidered cambric handkerchief, while at a little distancefrom these articles was a young woman, standing close to theiron gate, endeavoring to discern something on the otherside by means of the openings in the planks, -- theearnestness of her attitude and the fixed gaze with whichshe seemed to seek the object of her wishes, proving howmuch her feelings were interested in the matter. At thatinstant the little side-gate leading from the waste groundto the street was noiselessly opened, and a tall, powerfulyoung man appeared. He was dressed in a common gray blouseand velvet cap, but his carefully arranged hair, beard andmustache, all of the richest and glossiest black, illaccorded with his plebeian attire. After casting a rapidglance around him, in order to assure himself that he wasunobserved, he entered by the small gate, and, carefullyclosing and securing it after him, proceeded with a hurriedstep towards the barrier.

　　At the sight of him she expected, though probably not insuch a costume, the young woman started in terror, and wasabout to make a hasty retreat. But the eye of love hadalready seen, even through the narrow chinks of the woodenpalisades, the movement of the white robe, and observed thefluttering of the blue sash. Pressing his lips close to theplanks, he exclaimed, "Don't be alarmed, Valentine -- it isI!" Again the timid girl found courage to return to thegate, saying, as she did so, "And why do you come so lateto-day? It is almost dinner-time, and I had to use no littlediplomacy to get rid of my watchful mother-in-law, mytoo-devoted maid, and my troublesome brother, who is alwaysteasing me about coming to work at my embroidery, which I amin a fair way never to get done. So pray excuse yourself aswell as you can for having made me wait, and, after that,tell me why I see you in a dress so singular that at first Idid not recognize you."

　　"Dearest Valentine," said the young man, "the differencebetween our respective stations makes me fear to offend youby speaking of my love, but yet I cannot find myself in yourpresence without longing to pour forth my soul, and tell youhow fondly I adore you. If it be but to carry away with methe recollection of such sweet moments, I could even thankyou for chiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, thatif you did not expect me (and that indeed would be worsethan vanity to suppose), at least I was in your thoughts.You asked me the cause of my being late, and why I comedisguised. I will candidly explain the reason of both, and Itrust to your goodness to pardon me. I have chosen a trade."

　　"A trade? Oh, Maximilian, how can you jest at a time when wehave such deep cause for uneasiness?"

　　"Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearerto me than life itself! But listen to me, Valentine, and Iwill tell you all about it. I became weary of ranging fieldsand scaling walls, and seriously alarmed at the ideasuggested by you, that if caught hovering about here yourfather would very likely have me sent to prison as a thief.That would compromise the honor of the French army, to saynothing of the fact that the continual presence of a captainof Spahis in a place where no warlike projects could besupposed to account for it might well create surprise; so Ihave become a gardener, and, consequently, adopted thecostume of my calling."

　　"What excessive nonsense you talk, Maximilian!"

　　"Nonsense? Pray do not call what I consider the wisestaction of my life by such a name. Consider, by becoming agardener I effectually screen our meetings from allsuspicion or danger."

　　"I beseech of you, Maximilian, to cease trifling, and tellme what you really mean."

　　"Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground onwhich I stand was to let, I made application for it, wasreadily accepted by the proprietor, and am now master ofthis fine crop of lucerne. Think of that, Valentine! Thereis nothing now to prevent my building myself a little hut onmy plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you. Onlyimagine what happiness that would afford me. I can scarcelycontain myself at the bare idea. Such felicity seems aboveall price -- as a thing impossible and unattainable. Butwould you believe that I purchase all this delight, joy, andhappiness, for which I would cheerfully have surrendered tenyears of my life, at the small cost of 500 francs per annum,paid quarterly? Henceforth we have nothing to fear. I am onmy own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a ladderagainst the wall, and to look over when I please, withouthaving any apprehensions of being taken off by the police asa suspicious character. I may also enjoy the preciousprivilege of assuring you of my fond, faithful, andunalterable affection, whenever you visit your favoritebower, unless, indeed, it offends your pride to listen toprofessions of love from the lips of a poor workingman, cladin a blouse and cap." A faint cry of mingled pleasure andsurprise escaped from the lips of Valentine, who almostinstantly said, in a saddened tone, as though some enviouscloud darkened the joy which illumined her heart, "Alas, no,Maximilian, this must not be, for many reasons. We shouldpresume too much on our own strength, and, like others,perhaps, be led astray by our blind confidence in eachother's prudence."

　　"How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a thought,dear Valentine? Have I not, from the first blessed hour ofour acquaintance, schooled all my words and actions to yoursentiments and ideas? And you have, I am sure, the fullestconfidence in my honor. When you spoke to me of experiencinga vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, I placedmyself blindly and devotedly at your service, asking noother reward than the pleasure of being useful to you; andhave I ever since, by word or look, given you cause ofregret for having selected me from the numbers that wouldwillingly have sacrificed their lives for you? You told me,my dear Valentine, that you were engaged to M. d'Epinay, andthat your father was resolved upon completing the match, andthat from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefortwas never known to change a determination once formed. Ikept in the background, as you wished, and waited, not forthe decision of your heart or my own, but hoping thatprovidence would graciously interpose in our behalf, andorder events in our favor. But what cared I for delays ordifficulties, Valentine, as long as you confessed that youloved me, and took pity on me? If you will only repeat thatavowal now and then, I can endure anything."

　　"Ah, Maximilian, that is the very thing that makes you sobold, and which renders me at once so happy and unhappy,that I frequently ask myself whether it is better for me toendure the harshness of my mother-in-law, and her blindpreference for her own child, or to be, as I now am,insensible to any pleasure save such as I find in thesemeetings, so fraught with danger to both."

　　"I will not admit that word," returned the young man; "it isat once cruel and unjust. Is it possible to find a moresubmissive slave than myself? You have permitted me toconverse with you from time to time, Valentine, butforbidden my ever following you in your walks or elsewhere-- have I not obeyed? And since I found means to enter thisenclosure to exchange a few words with you through this gate-- to be close to you without really seeing you -- have Iever asked so much as to touch the hem of your gown or triedto pass this barrier which is but a trifle to one of myyouth and strength? Never has a complaint or a murmurescaped me. I have been bound by my promises as rigidly asany knight of olden times. Come, come, dearest Valentine,confess that what I say is true, lest I be tempted to callyou unjust."

　　"It is true," said Valentine, as she passed the end of herslender fingers through a small opening in the planks, andpermitted Maximilian to press his lips to them, "and you area true and faithful friend; but still you acted from motivesof self-interest, my dear Maximilian, for you well knew thatfrom the moment in which you had manifested an oppositespirit all would have been ended between us. You promised tobestow on me the friendly affection of a brother. For I haveno friend but yourself upon earth, who am neglected andforgotten by my father, harassed and persecuted by mymother-in-law, and left to the sole companionship of aparalyzed and speechless old man, whose withered hand can nolonger press mine, and who can speak to me with the eyealone, although there still lingers in his heart the warmesttenderness for his poor grandchild. Oh, how bitter a fate ismine, to serve either as a victim or an enemy to all who arestronger than myself, while my only friend and supporter isa living corpse! Indeed, indeed, Maximilian, I am verymiserable, and if you love me it must be out of pity."

　　"Valentine," replied the young man, deeply affected, "I willnot say you are all I love in the world, for I dearly prizemy sister and brother-in-law; but my affection for them iscalm and tranquil, in no manner resembling what I feel foryou. When I think of you my heart beats fast, the bloodburns in my veins, and I can hardly breathe; but I solemnlypromise you to restrain all this ardor, this fervor andintensity of feeling, until you yourself shall require me torender them available in serving or assisting you. M. Franzis not expected to return home for a year to come, I amtold; in that time many favorable and unforeseen chances maybefriend us. Let us, then, hope for the best; hope is sosweet a comforter. Meanwhile, Valentine, while reproachingme with selfishness, think a little what you have been to me-- the beautiful but cold resemblance of a marble Venus.What promise of future reward have you made me for all thesubmission and obedience I have evinced? -- none whatever.What granted me? -- scarcely more. You tell me of M. Franzd'Epinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the ideaof being his wife; but tell me, Valentine, is there no othersorrow in your heart? You see me devoted to you, body andsoul, my life and each warm drop that circles round my heartare consecrated to your service; you know full well that myexistence is bound up in yours -- that were I to lose you Iwould not outlive the hour of such crushing misery; yet youspeak with calmness of the prospect of your being the wifeof another! Oh, Valentine, were I in your place, and did Ifeel conscious, as you do, of being worshipped, adored, withsuch a love as mine, a hundred times at least should I havepassed my hand between these iron bars, and said, `Take thishand, dearest Maximilian, and believe that, living or dead,I am yours -- yours only, and forever!'" The poor girl madeno reply, but her lover could plainly hear her sobs andtears. A rapid change took place in the young man'sfeelings. "Dearest, dearest Valentine," exclaimed he,"forgive me if I have offended you, and forget the words Ispoke if they have unwittingly caused you pain."

　　"No, Maximilian, I am not offended," answered she, "but doyou not see what a poor, helpless being I am, almost astranger and an outcast in my father's house, where even heis seldom seen; whose will has been thwarted, and spiritsbroken, from the age of ten years, beneath the iron rod sosternly held over me; oppressed, mortified, and persecuted,day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, no person hascared for, even observed my sufferings, nor have I everbreathed one word on the subject save to yourself. Outwardlyand in the eyes of the world, I am surrounded by kindnessand affection; but the reverse is the case. The generalremark is, `Oh, it cannot be expected that one of so stern acharacter as M. Villefort could lavish the tenderness somefathers do on their daughters. What though she has lost herown mother at a tender age, she has had the happiness tofind a second mother in Madame de Villefort.' The world,however, is mistaken; my father abandons me from utterindifference, while my mother-in-law detests me with ahatred so much the more terrible because it is veiledbeneath a continual smile."

　　"Hate you, sweet Valentine," exclaimed the young man; "howis it possible for any one to do that?"

　　"Alas," replied the weeping girl, "I am obliged to own thatmy mother-in-law's aversion to me arises from a very naturalsource -- her overweening love for her own child, my brotherEdward."

　　"But why should it?"

　　"I do not know; but, though unwilling to introduce moneymatters into our present conversation, I will just say thismuch -- that her extreme dislike to me has its origin there;and I much fear she envies me the fortune I enjoy in rightof my mother, and which will be more than doubled at thedeath of M. and Mme. de Saint-Meran, whose sole heiress Iam. Madame de Villefort has nothing of her own, and hates mefor being so richly endowed. Alas, how gladly would Iexchange the half of this wealth for the happiness of atleast sharing my father's love. God knows, I would prefersacrificing the whole, so that it would obtain me a happyand affectionate home."

　　"Poor Valentine!"

　　"I seem to myself as though living a life of bondage, yet atthe same time am so conscious of my own weakness that I fearto break the restraint in which I am held, lest I fallutterly helpless. Then, too, my father is not a person whoseorders may be infringed with impunity; protected as he is byhis high position and firmly established reputation fortalent and unswerving integrity, no one could oppose him; heis all-powerful even with the king; he would crush you at aword. Dear Maximilian, believe me when I assure you that ifI do not attempt to resist my father's commands it is moreon your account than my own."

　　"But why, Valentine, do you persist in anticipating theworst, -- why picture so gloomy a future?"

　　"Because I judge it from the past."

　　"Still, consider that although I may not be, strictlyspeaking, what is termed an illustrious match for you, I am,for many reasons, not altogether so much beneath youralliance. The days when such distinctions were so nicelyweighed and considered no longer exist in France, and thefirst families of the monarchy have intermarried with thoseof the empire. The aristocracy of the lance has allieditself with the nobility of the cannon. Now I belong to thislast-named class; and certainly my prospects of militarypreferment are most encouraging as well as certain. Myfortune, though small, is free and unfettered, and thememory of my late father is respected in our country,Valentine, as that of the most upright and honorablemerchant of the city; I say our country, because you wereborn not far from Marseilles."

　　"Don't speak of Marseilles, I beg of you, Maximilian; thatone word brings back my mother to my recollection -- myangel mother, who died too soon for myself and all who knewher; but who, after watching over her child during the briefperiod allotted to her in this world, now, I fondly hope,watches from her home in heaven. Oh, if my mother were stillliving, there would be nothing to fear, Maximilian, for Iwould tell her that I loved you, and she would protect us."

　　"I fear, Valentine," replied the lover, "that were sheliving I should never have had the happiness of knowing you;you would then have been too happy to have stooped from yourgrandeur to bestow a thought on me."

　　"Now it is you who are unjust, Maximilian," cried Valentine;"but there is one thing I wish to know."

　　"And what is that?" inquired the young man, perceiving thatValentine hesitated.

　　"Tell me truly, Maximilian, whether in former days, when ourfathers dwelt at Marseilles, there was ever anymisunderstanding between them?"

　　"Not that I am aware of," replied the young man, "unless,indeed, any ill-feeling might have arisen from their beingof opposite parties -- your father was, as you know, azealous partisan of the Bourbons, while mine was whollydevoted to the emperor; there could not possibly be anyother difference between them. But why do you ask?"

　　"I will tell you," replied the young girl, "for it is butright you should know. Well, on the day when yourappointment as an officer of the Legion of honor wasannounced in the papers, we were all sitting with mygrandfather, M. Noirtier; M. Danglars was there also -- yourecollect M. Danglars, do you not, Maximilian, the banker,whose horses ran away with my mother-in-law and littlebrother, and very nearly killed them? While the rest of thecompany were discussing the approaching marriage ofMademoiselle Danglars, I was reading the paper to mygrandfather; but when I came to the paragraph about you,although I had done nothing else but read it over to myselfall the morning (you know you had told me all about it theprevious evening), I felt so happy, and yet so nervous, atthe idea of speaking your name aloud, and before so manypeople, that I really think I should have passed it over,but for the fear that my doing so might create suspicions asto the cause of my silence; so I summoned up all my courage,and read it as firmly and as steadily as I could."

　　"Dear Valentine!"

　　"Well, would you believe it? directly my father caught thesound of your name he turned round quite hastily, and, likea poor silly thing, I was so persuaded that every one mustbe as much affected as myself by the utterance of your name,that I was not surprised to see my father start, and almosttremble; but I even thought (though that surely must havebeen a mistake) that M. Danglars trembled too."

　　"`Morrel, Morrel,' cried my father, `stop a bit;' thenknitting his brows into a deep frown, he added, `surely thiscannot be one of the Morrel family who lived at Marseilles,and gave us so much trouble from their violent Bonapartism-- I mean about the year 1815.' -- `Yes,' replied M.Danglars, `I believe he is the son of the old shipowner.'"

　　"Indeed," answered Maximilian; "and what did your father saythen, Valentine?"

　　"Oh, such a dreadful thing, that I don't dare to tell you."

　　"Always tell me everything," said Maximilian with a smile.

　　"`Ah,' continued my father, still frowning, `their idolizedemperor treated these madmen as they deserved; he calledthem `food for powder,' which was precisely all they weregood for; and I am delighted to see that the presentgovernment have adopted this salutary principle with all itspristine vigor; if Algiers were good for nothing but tofurnish the means of carrying so admirable an idea intopractice, it would be an acquisition well worthy ofstruggling to obtain. Though it certainly does cost Francesomewhat dear to assert her rights in that uncivilizedcountry.'"

　　"Brutal politics, I must confess." said Maximilian; "butdon't attach any serious importance, dear, to what yourfather said. My father was not a bit behind yours in thatsort of talk. `Why,' said he, `does not the emperor, who hasdevised so many clever and efficient modes of improving theart of war, organize a regiment of lawyers, judges and legalpractitioners, sending them in the hottest fire the enemycould maintain, and using them to save better men?' You see,my dear, that for picturesque expression and generosity ofspirit there is not much to choose between the language ofeither party. But what did M. Danglars say to this outburston the part of the procureur?"

　　"Oh, he laughed, and in that singular manner so peculiar tohimself -- half-malicious, half-ferocious; he almostimmediately got up and took his leave; then, for the firsttime, I observed the agitation of my grandfather, and I musttell you, Maximilian, that I am the only person capable ofdiscerning emotion in his paralyzed frame. And I suspectedthat the conversation that had been carried on in hispresence (for they always say and do what they like beforethe dear old man, without the smallest regard for hisfeelings) had made a strong impression on his mind; for,naturally enough, it must have pained him to hear theemperor he so devotedly loved and served spoken of in thatdepreciating manner."

　　"The name of M. Noirtier," interposed Maximilian, "iscelebrated throughout Europe; he was a statesman of highstanding, and you may or may not know, Valentine, that hetook a leading part in every Bonapartist conspiracy set onfoot during the restoration of the Bourbons."

　　"Oh, I have often heard whispers of things that seem to memost strange -- the father a Bonapartist, the son aRoyalist; what can have been the reason of so singular adifference in parties and politics? But to resume my story;I turned towards my grandfather, as though to question himas to the cause of his emotion; he looked expressively atthe newspaper I had been reading. `What is the matter, deargrandfather?' said I, `are you pleased?' He gave me a signin the affirmative. `With what my father said just now?' Hereturned a sign in the negative. `Perhaps you liked what M.Danglars said?' Another sign in the negative. `Oh, then, youwere glad to hear that M. Morrel (I didn't dare to sayMaximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion ofHonor?' He signified assent; only think of the poor oldman's being so pleased to think that you, who were a perfectstranger to him, had been made an officer of the Legion ofHonor! Perhaps it was a mere whim on his part, for he isfalling, they say, into second childhood, but I love him forshowing so much interest in you."

　　"How singular," murmured Maximilian; "your father hates me,while your grandfather, on the contrary -- What strangefeelings are aroused by politics."

　　"Hush," cried Valentine, suddenly; "some one is coming!"Maximilian leaped at one bound into his crop of lucerne,which he began to pull up in the most ruthless way, underthe pretext of being occupied in weeding it.

　　"Mademoiselle, mademoiselle!" exclaimed a voice from behindthe trees. "Madame is searching for you everywhere; there isa visitor in the drawing-room."

　　"A visitor?" inquired Valentine, much agitated; "who is it?"

　　"Some grand personage -- a prince I believe they said -- theCount of Monte Cristo."

　　"I will come directly," cried Valentine aloud. The name ofMonte Cristo sent an electric shock through the young man onthe other side of the iron gate, to whom Valentine's "I amcoming" was the customary signal of farewell. "Now, then,"said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade, "Iwould give a good deal to know how it comes about that theCount of Monte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort."

　　Chapter 52Toxicology.

　　It was really the Count of Monte Cristo who had just arrivedat Madame de Villefort's for the purpose of returning theprocureur's visit, and at his name, as may be easilyimagined, the whole house was in confusion. Madame deVillefort, who was alone in her drawing-room when the countwas announced, desired that her son might be brought thitherinstantly to renew his thanks to the count; and Edward, whoheard this great personage talked of for two whole days,made all possible haste to come to him, not from obedienceto his mother, or out of any feeling of gratitude to thecount, but from sheer curiosity, and that some chance remarkmight give him the opportunity for making one of theimpertinent speeches which made his mother say, -- "Oh, thatnaughty child! But I can't be severe with him, he is reallyso bright."

　　After the usual civilities, the count inquired after M. deVillefort. "My husband dines with the chancellor," repliedthe young lady; "he has just gone, and I am sure he'll beexceedingly sorry not to have had the pleasure of seeing youbefore he went." Two visitors who were there when the countarrived, having gazed at him with all their eyes, retiredafter that reasonable delay which politeness admits andcuriosity requires. "What is your sister Valentine doing?"inquired Madame de Villefort of Edward; "tell some one tobid her come here, that I may have the honor of introducingher to the count."

　　"You have a daughter, then, madame?" inquired the count;"very young, I presume?"

　　"The daughter of M. de Villefort by his first marriage,"replied the young wife, "a fine well-grown girl."

　　"But melancholy," interrupted Master Edward, snatching thefeathers out of the tail of a splendid parroquet that wasscreaming on its gilded perch, in order to make a plume forhis hat. Madame de Villefort merely cried, -- "Be still,Edward!" She then added, -- "This young madcap is, however,very nearly right, and merely re-echoes what he has heard mesay with pain a hundred times; for Mademoiselle de Villefortis, in spite of all we can do to rouse her, of a melancholydisposition and taciturn habit, which frequently injure theeffect of her beauty. But what detains her? Go, Edward, andsee."

　　"Because they are looking for her where she is not to befound."

　　"And where are they looking for her?"

　　"With grandpapa Noirtier."

　　"And do you think she is not there?"

　　"No, no, no, no, no, she is not there," replied Edward,singing his words.

　　"And where is she, then? If you know, why don't you tell?"

　　"She is under the big chestnut-tree," replied the spoiledbrat, as he gave, in spite of his mother's commands, liveflies to the parrot, which seemed keenly to relish suchfare. Madame de Villefort stretched out her hand to ring,intending to direct her waiting-maid to the spot where shewould find Valentine, when the young lady herself enteredthe apartment. She appeared much dejected; and any personwho considered her attentively might have observed thetraces of recent tears in her eyes.

　　Valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our narrativepresented to our readers without formally introducing her,was a tall and graceful girl of nineteen, with brightchestnut hair, deep blue eyes, and that reposeful air ofquiet distinction which characterized her mother. Her whiteand slender fingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks tinted withvarying hues reminded one of the lovely Englishwomen whohave been so poetically compared in their manner to thegracefulness of a swan. She entered the apartment, andseeing near her stepmother the stranger of whom she hadalready heard so much, saluted him without any girlishawkwardness, or even lowering her eyes, and with an elegancethat redoubled the count's attention. He rose to return thesalutation. "Mademoiselle de Villefort, my daughter-in-law,"said Madame de Villefort to Monte Cristo, leaning back onher sofa and motioning towards Valentine with her hand. "AndM. de Monte Cristo, King of China, Emperor of Cochin-China,"said the young imp, looking slyly towards his sister.

　　Madame de Villefort at this really did turn pale, and wasvery nearly angry with this household plague, who answeredto the name of Edward; but the count, on the contrary,smiled, and appeared to look at the boy complacently, whichcaused the maternal heart to bound again with joy andenthusiasm.

　　"But, madame," replied the count, continuing theconversation, and looking by turns at Madame de Villefortand Valentine, "have I not already had the honor of meetingyourself and mademoiselle before? I could not help thinkingso just now; the idea came over my mind, and as mademoiselleentered the sight of her was an additional ray of lightthrown on a confused remembrance; excuse the remark."

　　"I do not think it likely, sir; Mademoiselle de Villefort isnot very fond of society, and we very seldom go out," saidthe young lady.

　　"Then it was not in society that I met with mademoiselle oryourself, madame, or this charming little merry boy.Besides, the Parisian world is entirely unknown to me, for,as I believe I told you, I have been in Paris but very fewdays. No, -- but, perhaps, you will permit me to call tomind -- stay!" The Count placed his hand on his brow as ifto collect his thoughts. "No -- it was somewhere -- awayfrom here -- it was -- I do not know -- but it appears thatthis recollection is connected with a lovely sky and somereligious fete; mademoiselle was holding flowers in herhand, the interesting boy was chasing a beautiful peacock ina garden, and you, madame, were under the trellis of somearbor. Pray come to my aid, madame; do not thesecircumstances appeal to your memory?"

　　"No, indeed," replied Madame de Villefort; "and yet itappears to me, sir, that if I had met you anywhere, therecollection of you must have been imprinted on my memory."

　　"Perhaps the count saw us in Italy," said Valentine timidly.

　　"Yes, in Italy; it was in Italy most probably," repliedMonte Cristo; "you have travelled then in Italy,mademoiselle?"

　　"Yes; madame and I were there two years ago. The doctors,anxious for my lungs, had prescribed the air of Naples. Wewent by Bologna, Perugia, and Rome."

　　"Ah, yes -- true, mademoiselle," exclaimed Monte Cristo asif this simple explanation was sufficient to revive therecollection he sought. "It was at Perugia on Corpus ChristiDay, in the garden of the Hotel des Postes, when chancebrought us together; you, Madame de Villefort, and her son;I now remember having had the honor of meeting you."

　　"I perfectly well remember Perugia, sir, and the Hotel desPostes, and the festival of which you speak," said Madame deVillefort, "but in vain do I tax my memory, of whosetreachery I am ashamed, for I really do not recall to mindthat I ever had the pleasure of seeing you before."

　　"It is strange, but neither do I recollect meeting withyou," observed Valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to thecount.

　　"But I remember it perfectly," interposed the darlingEdward.

　　"I will assist your memory, madame," continued the count;"the day had been burning hot; you were waiting for horses,which were delayed in consequence of the festival.Mademoiselle was walking in the shade of the garden, andyour son disappeared in pursuit of the peacock."

　　"And I caught it, mamma, don't you remember?" interposedEdward, "and I pulled three such beautiful feathers out ofhis tail."

　　"You, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not remember,that while you were seated on a stone bench, and while, as Itold you, Mademoiselle de Villefort and your young son wereabsent, you conversed for a considerable time withsomebody?"

　　"Yes, in truth, yes," answered the young lady, turning veryred, "I do remember conversing with a person wrapped in along woollen mantle; he was a medical man, I think."

　　"Precisely so, madame; this man was myself; for a fortnightI had been at that hotel, during which period I had cured myvalet de chambre of a fever, and my landlord of thejaundice, so that I really acquired a reputation as askilful physician. We discoursed a long time, madame, ondifferent subjects; of Perugino, of Raffaelle, of manners,customs, of the famous aquatofana, of which they had toldyou, I think you said, that certain individuals in Perugiahad preserved the secret."

　　"Yes, true," replied Madame de Villefort, somewhat uneasily,"I remember now."

　　"I do not recollect now all the various subjects of which wediscoursed, madame," continued the count with perfectcalmness; "but I perfectly remember that, falling into theerror which others had entertained respecting me, youconsulted me as to the health of Mademoiselle de Villefort."

　　"Yes, really, sir, you were in fact a medical man," saidMadame de Villefort, "since you had cured the sick."

　　"Moliere or Beaumarchais would reply to you, madame, that itwas precisely because I was not, that I had cured mypatients; for myself, I am content to say to you that I havestudied chemistry and the natural sciences somewhat deeply,but still only as an amateur, you understand." -- At thismoment the clock struck six. "It is six o'clock," saidMadame de Villefort, evidently agitated. "Valentine, willyou not go and see if your grandpapa will have his dinner?"Valentine rose, and saluting the count, left the apartmentwithout speaking.

　　"Oh, madame," said the count, when Valentine had left theroom, "was it on my account that you sent Mademoiselle deVillefort away?"

　　"By no means," replied the young lady quickly; "but this isthe hour when we usually give M. Noirtier the unwelcome mealthat sustains his pitiful existence. You are aware, sir, ofthe deplorable condition of my husband's father?"

　　"Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me -- aparalysis, I think."

　　"Alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; themind alone is still active in this human machine, and thatis faint and flickering, like the light of a lamp about toexpire. But excuse me, sir, for talking of our domesticmisfortunes; I interrupted you at the moment when you weretelling me that you were a skilful chemist."

　　"No, madame, I did not say as much as that," replied thecount with a smile; "quite the contrary. I have studiedchemistry because, having determined to live in easternclimates I have been desirous of following the example ofKing Mithridates."

　　"Mithridates rex Ponticus," said the young scamp, as he toresome beautiful portraits out of a splendid album, "theindividual who took cream in his cup of poison every morningat breakfast."

　　"Edward, you naughty boy," exclaimed Madame de Villefort,snatching the mutilated book from the urchin's grasp, "youare positively past bearing; you really disturb theconversation; go, leave us, and join your sister Valentinein dear grandpapa Noirtier's room."

　　"The album," said Edward sulkily.

　　"What do you mean? -- the album!"

　　"I want the album."

　　"How dare you tear out the drawings?"

　　"Oh, it amuses me."

　　"Go -- go at once."

　　"I won't go unless you give me the album," said the boy,seating himself doggedly in an arm-chair, according to hishabit of never giving way.

　　"Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer," said Madamede Villefort, giving the album to Edward, who then wenttowards the door, led by his mother. The count followed herwith his eyes.

　　"Let us see if she shuts the door after him," he muttered.Madame de Villefort closed the door carefully after thechild, the count appearing not to notice her; then casting ascrutinizing glance around the chamber, the young wifereturned to her chair, in which she seated herself. "Allowme to observe, madame," said the count, with that kind tonehe could assume so well, "you are really very severe withthat dear clever child."

　　"Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary," replied Madamede Villefort, with all a mother's real firmness.

　　"It was his Cornelius Nepos that Master Edward was repeatingwhen he referred to King Mithridates," continued the count,"and you interrupted him in a quotation which proves thathis tutor has by no means neglected him, for your son isreally advanced for his years."

　　"The fact is, count," answered the mother, agreeablyflattered, "he has great aptitude, and learns all that isset before him. He has but one fault, he is somewhat wilful;but really, on referring for the moment to what he said, doyou truly believe that Mithridates used these precautions,and that these precautions were efficacious?"

　　"I think so, madame, because I myself have made use of them,that I might not be poisoned at Naples, at Palermo, and atSmyrna -- that is to say, on three several occasions when,but for these precautions, I must have lost my life."

　　"And your precautions were successful?"

　　"Completely so."

　　"Yes, I remember now your mentioning to me at Perugiasomething of this sort."

　　"Indeed?" said the count with an air of surprise, remarkablywell counterfeited; "I really did not remember."

　　"I inquired of you if poisons acted equally, and with thesame effect, on men of the North as on men of the South; andyou answered me that the cold and sluggish habits of theNorth did not present the same aptitude as the rich andenergetic temperaments of the natives of the South."

　　"And that is the case," observed Monte Cristo. "I have seenRussians devour, without being visibly inconvenienced,vegetable substances which would infallibly have killed aNeapolitan or an Arab."

　　"And you really believe the result would be still more surewith us than in the East, and in the midst of our fogs andrains a man would habituate himself more easily than in awarm latitude to this progressive absorption of poison?"

　　"Certainly; it being at the same time perfectly understoodthat he should have been duly fortified against the poisonto which he had not been accustomed."

　　"Yes, I understand that; and how would you habituateyourself, for instance, or rather, how did you habituateyourself to it?"

　　"Oh, very easily. Suppose you knew beforehand the poisonthat would be made use of against you; suppose the poisonwas, for instance, brucine" --

　　"Brucine is extracted from the false angostura* is it not?"inquired Madame de Villefort.

　　"Precisely, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "but I perceive Ihave not much to teach you. Allow me to compliment you onyour knowledge; such learning is very rare among ladies."

　　* Brucoea ferruginea.

　　"Oh, I am aware of that," said Madame de Villefort; "but Ihave a passion for the occult sciences, which speak to theimagination like poetry, and are reducible to figures, likean algebraic equation; but go on, I beg of you; what you sayinterests me to the greatest degree."

　　"Well," replied Monte Cristo "suppose, then, that thispoison was brucine, and you were to take a milligramme thefirst day, two milligrammes the second day, and so on. Well,at the end of ten days you would have taken a centigramme,at the end of twenty days, increasing another milligramme,you would have taken three hundred centigrammes; that is tosay, a dose which you would support without inconvenience,and which would be very dangerous for any other person whohad not taken the same precautions as yourself. Well, then,at the end of a month, when drinking water from the samecarafe, you would kill the person who drank with you,without your perceiving, otherwise than from slightinconvenience, that there was any poisonous substancemingled with this water."

　　"Do you know any other counter-poisons?"

　　"I do not."

　　"I have often read, and read again, the history ofMithridates," said Madame de Villefort in a tone ofreflection, "and had always considered it a fable."

　　"No, madame, contrary to most history, it is true; but whatyou tell me, madame, what you inquire of me, is not theresult of a chance query, for two years ago you asked me thesame questions, and said then, that for a very long timethis history of Mithridates had occupied your mind."

　　"True, sir. The two favorite studies of my youth were botanyand mineralogy, and subsequently, when I learned that theuse of simples frequently explained the whole history of apeople, and the entire life of individuals in the East, asflowers betoken and symbolize a love affair, I haveregretted that I was not a man, that I might have been aFlamel, a Fontana, or a Cabanis."

　　"And the more, madame," said Monte Cristo, "as the Orientalsdo not confine themselves, as did Mithridates, to make acuirass of his poisons, but they also made them a dagger.Science becomes, in their hands, not only a defensiveweapon, but still more frequently an offensive one; the oneserves against all their physical sufferings, the otheragainst all their enemies. With opium, belladonna, brucaea,snake-wood, and the cherry-laurel, they put to sleep all whostand in their way. There is not one of those women,Egyptian, Turkish, or Greek, whom here you call `goodwomen,' who do not know how, by means of chemistry, tostupefy a doctor, and in psychology to amaze a confessor."

　　"Really," said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled withstrange fire at this conversation.

　　"Oh, yes, indeed, madame," continued Monte Cristo, "thesecret dramas of the East begin with a love philtre and endwith a death potion -- begin with paradise and end with --hell. There are as many elixirs of every kind as there arecaprices and peculiarities in the physical and moral natureof humanity; and I will say further -- the art of thesechemists is capable with the utmost precision to accommodateand proportion the remedy and the bane to yearnings for loveor desires for vengeance."

　　"But, sir," remarked the young woman, "these Easternsocieties, in the midst of which you have passed a portionof your existence, are as fantastic as the tales that comefrom their strange land. A man can easily be put out of theway there, then; it is, indeed, the Bagdad and Bassora ofthe `Thousand and One Nights.' The sultans and viziers whorule over society there, and who constitute what in Francewe call the government, are really Haroun-al-Raschids andGiaffars, who not only pardon a poisoner, but even make hima prime minister, if his crime has been an ingenious one,and who, under such circumstances, have the whole storywritten in letters of gold, to divert their hours ofidleness and ennui."

　　"By no means, madame; the fanciful exists no longer in theEast. There, disguised under other names, and concealedunder other costumes, are police agents, magistrates,attorneys-general, and bailiffs. They hang, behead, andimpale their criminals in the most agreeable possiblemanner; but some of these, like clever rogues, havecontrived to escape human justice, and succeed in theirfraudulent enterprises by cunning stratagems. Amongst us asimpleton, possessed by the demon of hate or cupidity, whohas an enemy to destroy, or some near relation to disposeof, goes straight to the grocer's or druggist's, gives afalse name, which leads more easily to his detection thanhis real one, and under the pretext that the rats preventhim from sleeping, purchases five or six grammes of arsenic-- if he is really a cunning fellow, he goes to five or sixdifferent druggists or grocers, and thereby becomes onlyfive or six times more easily traced; -- then, when he hasacquired his specific, he administers duly to his enemy, ornear kinsman, a dose of arsenic which would make a mammothor mastodon burst, and which, without rhyme or reason, makeshis victim utter groans which alarm the entire neighborhood.Then arrive a crowd of policemen and constables. They fetcha doctor, who opens the dead body, and collects from theentrails and stomach a quantity of arsenic in a spoon. Nextday a hundred newspapers relate the fact, with the names ofthe victim and the murderer. The same evening the grocer orgrocers, druggist or druggists, come and say, `It was I whosold the arsenic to the gentleman;' and rather than notrecognize the guilty purchaser, they will recognize twenty.Then the foolish criminal is taken, imprisoned,interrogated, confronted, confounded, condemned, and cut offby hemp or steel; or if she be a woman of any consideration,they lock her up for life. This is the way in which youNortherns understand chemistry, madame. Desrues was,however, I must confess, more skilful."

　　"What would you have, sir?" said the lady, laughing; "we dowhat we can. All the world has not the secret of the Medicisor the Borgias."

　　"Now," replied the count, shrugging his shoulders, "shall Itell you the cause of all these stupidities? It is because,at your theatres, by what at least I could judge by readingthe pieces they play, they see persons swallow the contentsof a phial, or suck the button of a ring, and fall deadinstantly. Five minutes afterwards the curtain falls, andthe spectators depart. They are ignorant of the consequencesof the murder; they see neither the police commissary withhis badge of office, nor the corporal with his four men; andso the poor fools believe that the whole thing is as easy aslying. But go a little way from France -- go either toAleppo or Cairo, or only to Naples or Rome, and you will seepeople passing by you in the streets -- people erect,smiling, and fresh-colored, of whom Asmodeus, if you wereholding on by the skirt of his mantle, would say, `That manwas poisoned three weeks ago; he will be a dead man in amonth.'"

　　"Then," remarked Madame de Villefort, "they have againdiscovered the secret of the famous aquatofana that theysaid was lost at Perugia."

　　"Ah, but madame, does mankind ever lose anything? The artschange about and make a tour of the world; things take adifferent name, and the vulgar do not follow them -- that isall; but there is always the same result. Poisons actparticularly on some organ or another -- one on the stomach,another on the brain, another on the intestines. Well, thepoison brings on a cough, the cough an inflammation of thelungs, or some other complaint catalogued in the book ofscience, which, however, by no means precludes it from beingdecidedly mortal; and if it were not, would be sure tobecome so, thanks to the remedies applied by foolishdoctors, who are generally bad chemists, and which will actin favor of or against the malady, as you please; and thenthere is a human being killed according to all the rules ofart and skill, and of whom justice learns nothing, as wassaid by a terrible chemist of my acquaintance, the worthyAbbe Adelmonte of Taormina, in Sicily, who has studied thesenational phenomena very profoundly."

　　"It is quite frightful, but deeply interesting," said theyoung lady, motionless with attention. "I thought, I mustconfess, that these tales, were inventions of the MiddleAges."

　　"Yes, no doubt, but improved upon by ours. What is the useof time, rewards of merit, medals, crosses, Monthyon prizes,if they do not lead society towards more completeperfection? Yet man will never be perfect until he learns tocreate and destroy; he does know how to destroy, and that ishalf the battle."

　　"So," added Madame de Villefort, constantly returning to herobject, "the poisons of the Borgias, the Medicis, the Renes,the Ruggieris, and later, probably, that of Baron de Trenck,whose story has been so misused by modern drama and romance"--

　　"Were objects of art, madame, and nothing more," replied thecount. "Do you suppose that the real savant addresseshimself stupidly to the mere individual? By no means.Science loves eccentricities, leaps and bounds, trials ofstrength, fancies, if I may be allowed so to term them.Thus, for instance, the excellent Abbe Adelmonte, of whom Ispoke just now, made in this way some marvellousexperiments."

　　"Really?"

　　"Yes; I will mention one to you. He had a remarkably finegarden, full of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. From amongstthese vegetables he selected the most simple -- a cabbage,for instance. For three days he watered this cabbage with adistillation of arsenic; on the third, the cabbage began todroop and turn yellow. At that moment he cut it. In the eyesof everybody it seemed fit for table, and preserved itswholesome appearance. It was only poisoned to the AbbeAdelmonte. He then took the cabbage to the room where he hadrabbits -- for the Abbe Adelmonte had a collection ofrabbits, cats, and guinea-pigs, fully as fine as hiscollection of vegetables, flowers, and fruit. Well, the AbbeAdelmonte took a rabbit, and made it eat a leaf of thecabbage. The rabbit died. What magistrate would find, oreven venture to insinuate, anything against this? Whatprocureur has ever ventured to draw up an accusation againstM. Magendie or M. Flourens, in consequence of the rabbits,cats, and guinea-pigs they have killed? -- not one. So,then, the rabbit dies, and justice takes no notice. Thisrabbit dead, the Abbe Adelmonte has its entrails taken outby his cook and thrown on the dunghill; on this dunghill isa hen, who, pecking these intestines, is in her turn takenill, and dies next day. At the moment when she is strugglingin the convulsions of death, a vulture is flying by (thereare a good many vultures in Adelmonte's country); this birddarts on the dead fowl, and carries it away to a rock, whereit dines off its prey. Three days afterwards, this poorvulture, which has been very much indisposed since thatdinner, suddenly feels very giddy while flying aloft in theclouds, and falls heavily into a fish-pond. The pike, eels,and carp eat greedily always, as everybody knows -- well,they feast on the vulture. Now suppose that next day, one ofthese eels, or pike, or carp, poisoned at the fourth remove,is served up at your table. Well, then, your guest will bepoisoned at the fifth remove, and die, at the end of eightor ten days, of pains in the intestines, sickness, orabscess of the pylorus. The doctors open the body and saywith an air of profound learning, `The subject his died of atumor on the liver, or of typhoid fever!'"

　　"But," remarked Madame de Villefort, "all thesecircumstances which you link thus to one another may bebroken by the least accident; the vulture may not see thefowl, or may fall a hundred yards from the fish-pond."

　　"Ah, that is where the art comes in. To be a great chemistin the East, one must direct chance; and this is to beachieved." -- Madame de Villefort was in deep thought, yetlistened attentively. "But," she exclaimed, suddenly,"arsenic is indelible, indestructible; in whatsoever way itis absorbed, it will be found again in the body of thevictim from the moment when it has been taken in sufficientquantity to cause death."

　　"Precisely so," cried Monte Cristo -- "precisely so; andthis is what I said to my worthy Adelmonte. He reflected,smiled, and replied to me by a Sicilian proverb, which Ibelieve is also a French proverb, `My son, the world was notmade in a day -- but in seven. Return on Sunday.' On theSunday following I did return to him. Instead of havingwatered his cabbage with arsenic, he had watered it thistime with a solution of salts, having their basis instrychnine, strychnos colubrina, as the learned term it.Now, the cabbage had not the slightest appearance of diseasein the world, and the rabbit had not the smallest distrust;yet, five minutes afterwards, the rabbit was dead. The fowlpecked at the rabbit, and the next day was a dead hen. Thistime we were the vultures; so we opened the bird, and thistime all special symptoms had disappeared, there were onlygeneral symptoms. There was no peculiar indication in anyorgan -- an excitement of the nervous system -- that was it;a case of cerebral congestion -- nothing more. The fowl hadnot been poisoned -- she had died of apoplexy. Apoplexy is arare disease among fowls, I believe, but very common amongmen." Madame de Villefort appeared more and more thoughtful.

　　"It is very fortunate," she observed, "that such substancescould only be prepared by chemists; otherwise, all the worldwould be poisoning each other."

　　"By chemists and persons who have a taste for chemistry,"said Monte Cristo carelessly.

　　"And then," said Madame de Villefort, endeavoring by astruggle, and with effort, to get away from her thoughts,"however skilfully it is prepared, crime is always crime,and if it avoid human scrutiny, it does not escape the eyeof God. The Orientals are stronger than we are in cases ofconscience, and, very prudently, have no hell -- that is thepoint."

　　"Really, madame, this is a scruple which naturally mustoccur to a pure mind like yours, but which would easilyyield before sound reasoning. The bad side of human thoughtwill always be defined by the paradox of Jean JacquesRousseau, -- you remember, -- the mandarin who is killedfive hundred leagues off by raising the tip of the finger.Man's whole life passes in doing these things, and hisintellect is exhausted by reflecting on them. You will findvery few persons who will go and brutally thrust a knife inthe heart of a fellow-creature, or will administer to him,in order to remove him from the surface of the globe onwhich we move with life and animation, that quantity ofarsenic of which we just now talked. Such a thing is reallyout of rule -- eccentric or stupid. To attain such a point,the blood must be heated to thirty-six degrees, the pulsebe, at least, at ninety, and the feelings excited beyond theordinary limit. But suppose one pass, as is permissible inphilology, from the word itself to its softened synonym,then, instead of committing an ignoble assassination youmake an `elimination;' you merely and simply remove fromyour path the individual who is in your way, and thatwithout shock or violence, without the display of thesufferings which, in the case of becoming a punishment, makea martyr of the victim, and a butcher, in every sense of theword, of him who inflicts them. Then there will be no blood,no groans, no convulsions, and above all, no consciousnessof that horrid and compromising moment of accomplishing theact, -- then one escapes the clutch of the human law, whichsays, `Do not disturb society!' This is the mode in whichthey manage these things, and succeed in Eastern climes,where there are grave and phlegmatic persons who care verylittle for the questions of time in conjunctures ofimportance."

　　"Yet conscience remains," remarked Madame de Villefort in anagitated voice, and with a stifled sigh.

　　"Yes," answered Monte Cristo "happily, yes, conscience doesremain; and if it did not, how wretched we should be! Afterevery action requiring exertion, it is conscience that savesus, for it supplies us with a thousand good excuses, ofwhich we alone are judges; and these reasons, howsoeverexcellent in producing sleep, would avail us but very littlebefore a tribunal, when we were tried for our lives. ThusRichard III., for instance, was marvellously served by hisconscience after the putting away of the two children ofEdward IV.; in fact, he could say, `These two children of acruel and persecuting king, who have inherited the vices oftheir father, which I alone could perceive in their juvenilepropensities -- these two children are impediments in my wayof promoting the happiness of the English people, whoseunhappiness they (the children) would infallibly havecaused.' Thus was Lady Macbeth served by her conscience,when she sought to give her son, and not her husband(whatever Shakspeare may say), a throne. Ah, maternal loveis a great virtue, a powerful motive -- so powerful that itexcuses a multitude of things, even if, after Duncan'sdeath, Lady Macbeth had been at all pricked by herconscience."

　　Madame de Villefort listened with avidity to these appallingmaxims and horrible paradoxes, delivered by the count withthat ironical simplicity which was peculiar to him. After amoment's silence, the lady inquired, "Do you know, my dearcount," she said, "that you are a very terrible reasoner,and that you look at the world through a somewhatdistempered medium? Have you really measured the world byscrutinies, or through alembics and crucibles? For you mustindeed be a great chemist, and the elixir you administeredto my son, which recalled him to life almostinstantaneously" --

　　"Oh, do not place any reliance on that, madame; one drop ofthat elixir sufficed to recall life to a dying child, butthree drops would have impelled the blood into his lungs insuch a way as to have produced most violent palpitations;six would have suspended his respiration, and caused syncopemore serious than that in which he was; ten would havedestroyed him. You know, madame, how suddenly I snatched himfrom those phials which he so imprudently touched?"

　　"Is it then so terrible a poison?"

　　"Oh, no. In the first place, let us agree that the wordpoison does not exist, because in medicine use is made ofthe most violent poisons, which become, according as theyare employed, most salutary remedies."

　　"What, then, is it?"

　　"A skilful preparation of my friend's the worthy AbbeAdelmonte, who taught me the use of it."

　　"Oh," observed Madame de Villefort, "it must be an admirableanti-spasmodic."

　　"Perfect, madame, as you have seen," replied the count; "andI frequently make use of it -- with all possible prudencethough, be it observed," he added with a smile of

　　intelligence.

　　"Most assuredly," responded Madame de Villefort in the sametone. "As for me, so nervous, and so subject to faintingfits, I should require a Doctor Adelmonte to invent for mesome means of breathing freely and tranquillizing my mind,in the fear I have of dying some fine day of suffocation. Inthe meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in France,and your abbe is not probably disposed to make a journey toParis on my account, I must continue to use MonsieurPlanche's anti-spasmodics; and mint and Hoffman's drops areamong my favorite remedies. Here are some lozenges which Ihave made up on purpose; they are compounded doubly strong."Monte Cristo opened the tortoise-shell box, which the ladypresented to him, and inhaled the odor of the lozenges withthe air of an amateur who thoroughly appreciated theircomposition. "They are indeed exquisite," he said; "but asthey are necessarily submitted to the process of deglutition-- a function which it is frequently impossible for afainting person to accomplish -- I prefer my own specific."

　　"Undoubtedly, and so should I prefer it, after the effects Ihave seen produced; but of course it is a secret, and I amnot so indiscreet as to ask it of you."

　　"But I," said Monte Cristo, rising as he spoke -- "I amgallant enough to offer it you."

　　"How kind you are."

　　"Only remember one thing -- a small dose is a remedy, alarge one is poison. One drop will restore life, as you haveseen; five or six will inevitably kill, and in a way themore terrible inasmuch as, poured into a glass of wine, itwould not in the slightest degree affect its flavor. But Isay no more, madame; it is really as if I were prescribingfor you." The clock struck half-past six, and a lady wasannounced, a friend of Madame de Villefort, who came to dinewith her.

　　"If I had had the honor of seeing you for the third orfourth time, count, instead of only for the second," saidMadame de Villefort; "if I had had the honor of being yourfriend, instead of only having the happiness of being underan obligation to you, I should insist on detaining you todinner, and not allow myself to be daunted by a firstrefusal."

　　"A thousand thanks, madame," replied Monte Cristo "but Ihave an engagement which I cannot break. I have promised toescort to the Academie a Greek princess of my acquaintancewho has never seen your grand opera, and who relies on me toconduct her thither."

　　"Adieu, then, sir, and do not forget the prescription."

　　"Ah, in truth, madame, to do that I must forget the hour'sconversation I have had with you, which is indeedimpossible." Monte Cristo bowed, and left the house. Madamede Villefort remained immersed in thought. "He is a verystrange man," she said, "and in my opinion is himself theAdelmonte he talks about." As to Monte Cristo the result hadsurpassed his utmost expectations. "Good," said he, as hewent away; "this is a fruitful soil, and I feel certain thatthe seed sown will not be cast on barren ground." Nextmorning, faithful to his promise, he sent the prescriptionrequested.

　　Chapter 53Robert le Diable.

　　The pretext of an opera engagement was so much the morefeasible, as there chanced to be on that very night a morethan ordinary attraction at the Academie Royale. Levasseur,who had been suffering under severe illness, made hisreappearance in the character of Bertrand, and, as usual,the announcement of the most admired production of thefavorite composer of the day had attracteda brilliant andfashionable audience. Morcerf, like most other young men ofrank and fortune, had his orchestra stall, with thecertainty of always finding a seat in at least a dozen ofthe principal boxes occupied by persons of his acquaintance;he had, moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus box.Chateau-Renaud rented a stall beside his own, whileBeauchamp, as a journalist, had unlimited range all over the

　　theatre. It happened that on this particular night theminister's box was placed at the disposal of Lucien Debray,who offered it to the Comte de Morcerf, who again, upon hismother's rejection of it, sent it to Danglars, with anintimation that he should probably do himself the honor ofjoining the baroness and her daughter during the evening, inthe event of their accepting the box in question. The ladiesreceived the offer with too much pleasure to dream of arefusal. To no class of persons is the presentation of agratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the wealthymillionaire, who still hugs economy while boasting ofcarrying a king's ransom in his waistcoat pocket.

　　Danglars had, however, protested against showing himself ina ministerial box, declaring that his political principles,and his parliamentary position as member of the oppositionparty would not permit him so to commit himself; thebaroness had, therefore, despatched a note to Lucien Debray,bidding him call for them, it being wholly impossible forher to go alone with Eugenie to the opera. There is nogainsaying the fact that a very unfavorable constructionwould have been put upon the circumstance if the two womenhad gone without escort, while the addition of a third, inthe person of her mother's admitted lover, enabledMademoiselle Danglars to defy malice and ill-nature. Onemust take the world as one finds it.

　　The curtain rose, as usual, to an almost empty house, itbeing one of the absurdities of Parisian fashion never toappear at the opera until after the beginning of theperformance, so that the first act is generally playedwithout the slightest attention being paid to it, that partof the audience already assembled being too much occupied inobserving the fresh arrivals, while nothing is heard but thenoise of opening and shutting doors, and the buzz ofconversation. "Surely," said Albert, as the door of a box onthe first circle opened, "that must be the Countess G----."

　　"And who is the Countess G---- ?" inquired Chateau-Renaud.

　　"What a question! Now, do you know, baron, I have a greatmind to pick a quarrel with you for asking it; as if all theworld did not know who the Countess G---- was."

　　"Ah, to be sure," replied Chateau-Renaud; "the lovelyVenetian, is it not?"

　　"Herself." At this moment the countess perceived Albert, andreturned his salutation with a smile. "You know her, itseems?" said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"Franz introduced me to her at Rome," replied Albert.

　　"Well, then, will you do as much for me in Paris as Franzdid for you in Rome?"

　　"With pleasure."

　　There was a cry of "Shut up!" from the audience. Thismanifestation on the part of the spectators of their wish tobe allowed to hear the music, produced not the slightesteffect on the two young men, who continued theirconversation. "The countess was present at the races in theChamp-de-Mars," said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"To-day?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Bless me, I quite forgot the races. Did you bet?"

　　"Oh, merely a paltry fifty louis."

　　"And who was the winner?"

　　"Nautilus. I staked on him."

　　"But there were three races, were there not?"

　　"Yes; there was the prize given by the Jockey Club -- a goldcup, you know -- and a very singular circumstance occurredabout that race."

　　"What was it?"

　　"Oh, shut up!" again interposed some of the audience.

　　"Why, it was won by a horse and rider utterly unknown on thecourse."

　　"Is that possible?"

　　"True as day. The fact was, nobody had observed a horseentered by the name of Vampa, or that of a jockey styledJob, when, at the last moment, a splendid roan, mounted by ajockey about as big as your fist, presented themselves atthe starting-post. They were obliged to stuff at leasttwenty pounds weight of shot in the small rider's pockets,to make him weight; but with all that he outstripped Arieland Barbare, against whom he ran, by at least three wholelengths."

　　"And was it not found out at last to whom the horse andjockey belonged?"

　　"No."

　　"You say that the horse was entered under the name ofVampa?"

　　"Exactly; that was the title."

　　"Then," answered Albert, "I am better informed than you are,and know who the owner of that horse was."

　　"Shut up, there!" cried the pit in chorus. And this time thetone and manner in which the command was given, betokenedsuch growing hostility that the two young men perceived, forthe first time, that the mandate was addressed to them.Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized the variouscountenances around them, as though demanding some oneperson who would take upon himself the responsibility ofwhat they deemed excessive impertinence; but as no oneresponded to the challenge, the friends turned again to thefront of the theatre, and affected to busy themselves withthe stage. At this moment the door of the minister's boxopened, and Madame Danglars, accompanied by her daughter,entered, escorted by Lucien Debray, who assiduouslyconducted them to their seats.

　　"Ha, ha," said Chateau-Renaud, "here comes some friends ofyours, viscount! What are you looking at there? don't yousee they are trying to catch your eye?" Albert turned round,just in time to receive a gracious wave of the fan from thebaroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugenie, she scarcelyvouchsafed to waste the glances of her large black eyes evenupon the business of the stage. "I tell you what, my dearfellow," said Chateau-Renaud, "I cannot imagine whatobjection you can possibly have to Mademoiselle Danglars --that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhatinferior rank, which by the way I don't think you care verymuch about. Now, barring all that, I mean to say she is adeuced fine girl!"

　　"Handsome, certainly," replied Albert, "but not to my taste,which I confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, andmore feminine."

　　"Ah, well," exclaimed Chateau-Renaud, who because he hadseen his thirtieth summer fancied himself duly warranted inassuming a sort of paternal air with his more youthfulfriend, "you young people are never satisfied; why, whatwould you have more? your parents have chosen you a bridebuilt on the model of Diana, the huntress, and yet you arenot content."

　　"No, for that very resemblance affrights me; I should haveliked something more in the manner of the Venus of Milo orCapua; but this chase-loving Diana continually surrounded byher nymphs gives me a sort of alarm lest she should some daybring on me the fate of Actaeon."

　　And, indeed, it required but one glance at MademoiselleDanglars to comprehend the justness of Morcerf's remark --she was beautiful, but her beauty was of too marked anddecided a character to please a fastidious taste; her hairwas raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhatrebellious; her eyes, of the same color as her hair, weresurmounted by well-arched brows, whose great defect,however, consisted in an almost habitual frown, while herwhole physiognomy wore that expression of firmness anddecision so little in accordance with the gentler attributesof her sex -- her nose was precisely what a sculptor wouldhave chosen for a chiselled Juno. Her mouth, which mighthave been found fault with as too large, displayed teeth ofpearly whiteness, rendered still more conspicuous by thebrilliant carmine of her lips, contrasting vividly with hernaturally pale complexion. But that which completed thealmost masculine look Morcerf found so little to his taste,was a dark mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaksof nature generally are, placed just at the corner of hermouth; and the effect tended to increase the expression ofself-dependence that characterized her countenance. The restof Mademoiselle Eugenie's person was in perfect keeping withthe head just described; she, indeed, reminded one of Diana,as Chateau-Renaud observed, but her bearing was more haughtyand resolute. As regarded her attainments, the only fault tobe found with them was the same that a fastidiousconnoisseur might have found with her beauty, that they weresomewhat too erudite and masculine for so young a person.She was a perfect linguist, a first-rate artist, wrotepoetry, and composed music; to the study of the latter sheprofessed to be entirely devoted, following it with anindefatigable perseverance, assisted by a schoolfellow, -- ayoung woman without fortune whose talent promised to developinto remarkable powers as a singer. It was rumored that shewas an object of almost paternal interest to one of theprincipal composers of the day, who excited her to spare nopains in the cultivation of her voice, which might hereafterprove a source of wealth and independence. But this counseleffectually decided Mademoiselle Danglars never to commitherself by being seen in public with one destined for atheatrical life; and acting upon this principle, thebanker's daughter, though perfectly willing to allowMademoiselle Louise d'Armilly (that was the name of theyoung virtuosa) to practice with her through the day, tookespecial care not to be seen in her company. Still, thoughnot actually received at the Hotel Danglars in the light ofan acknowledged friend, Louise was treated with far morekindness and consideration than is usually bestowed on agoverness.

　　The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance ofMadame Danglars into her box, the band quitted the orchestrafor the accustomed half-hour's interval allowed between theacts, and the audience were left at liberty to promenade thesalon or lobbies, or to pay and receive visits in theirrespective boxes. Morcerf and Chateau-Renaud were amongstthe first to avail themselves of this permission. For aninstant the idea struck Madame Danglars that this eagernesson the part of the young viscount arose from his impatienceto join her party, and she whispered her expectations to herdaughter, that Albert was hurrying to pay his respects tothem. Mademoiselle Eugenie, however, merely returned adissenting movement of the head, while, with a cold smile,she directed the attention of her mother to an opposite boxon the first circle, in which sat the Countess G---- , andwhere Morcerf had just made his appearance. "So we meetagain, my travelling friend, do we?" cried the countess,extending her hand to him with all the warmth and cordialityof an old acquaintance; "it was really very good of you torecognize me so quickly, and still more so to bestow yourfirst visit on me."

　　"Be assured," replied Albert, "that if I had been aware ofyour arrival in Paris, and had known your address, I shouldhave paid my respects to you before this. Allow me tointroduce my friend, Baron de Chateau-Renaud, one of the fewtrue gentlemen now to be found in France, and from whom Ihave just learned that you were a spectator of the races inthe Champ-de-Mars, yesterday." Chateau-Renaud bowed to thecountess.

　　"So you were at the races, baron?" inquired the countesseagerly.

　　"Yes, madame."

　　"Well, then," pursued Madame G---- with considerableanimation, "you can probably tell me who won the Jockey Clubstakes?"

　　"I am sorry to say I cannot," replied the baron; "and I wasjust asking the same question of Albert."

　　"Are you very anxious to know, countess?" asked Albert.

　　"To know what?"

　　"The name of the owner of the winning horse?"

　　"Excessively; only imagine -- but do tell me, viscount,whether you really are acquainted with it or no?"

　　"I beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relatesome story, were you not? You said, `only imagine,' -- andthen paused. Pray continue."

　　"Well, then, listen. You must know I felt so interested inthe splendid roan horse, with his elegant little rider, sotastefully dressed in a pink satin jacket and cap, that Icould not help praying for their success with as muchearnestness as though the half of my fortune were at stake;and when I saw them outstrip all the others, and come to thewinning-post in such gallant style, I actually clapped myhands with joy. Imagine my surprise, when, upon returninghome, the first object I met on the staircase was theidentical jockey in the pink jacket! I concluded that, bysome singular chance, the owner of the winning horse mustlive in the same hotel as myself; but, as I entered myapartments, I beheld the very gold cup awarded as a prize tothe unknown horse and rider. Inside the cup was a smallpiece of paper, on which were written these words -- `FromLord Ruthven to Countess G---- .'"

　　"Precisely; I was sure of it," said Morcerf.

　　"Sure of what?"

　　"That the owner of the horse was Lord Ruthven himself."

　　"What Lord Ruthven do you mean?"

　　"Why, our Lord Ruthven -- the Vampire of the SalleArgentino!"

　　"Is it possible?" exclaimed the countess; "is he here inParis?"

　　"To be sure, -- why not?"

　　"And you visit him? -- meet him at your own house andelsewhere?"

　　"I assure you he is my most intimate friend, and M. deChateau-Renaud has also the honor of his acquaintance."

　　"But why are you so sure of his being the winner of theJockey Club prize?"

　　"Was not the winning horse entered by the name of Vampa?"

　　"What of that?"

　　"Why, do you not recollect the name of the celebrated banditby whom I was made prisoner?"

　　"Oh, yes."

　　"And from whose hands the count extricated me in sowonderful a manner?"

　　"To be sure, I remember it all now."

　　"He called himself Vampa. You see. it's evident where thecount got the name."

　　"But what could have been his motive for sending the cup tome?"

　　"In the first place, because I had spoken much of you tohim, as you may believe; and in the second, because hedelighted to see a countrywoman take so lively an interestin his success."

　　"I trust and hope you never repeated to the count all thefoolish remarks we used to make about him?"

　　"I should not like to affirm upon oath that I have not.Besides, his presenting you the cup under the name of LordRuthven" --

　　"Oh, but that is dreadful! Why, the man must owe me afearful grudge."

　　"Does his action appear like that of an enemy?"

　　"No; certainly not."

　　"Well, then" --

　　"And so he is in Paris?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And what effect does he produce?"

　　"Why," said Albert, "he was talked about for a week; thenthe coronation of the queen of England took place, followedby the theft of Mademoiselle Mars's diamonds; and so peopletalked of something else."

　　"My good fellow," said Chateau-Renaud, "the count is yourfriend and you treat him accordingly. Do not believe whatAlbert is telling you, countess; so far from the sensationexcited in the Parisian circles by the appearance of theCount of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon myself todeclare that it is as strong as ever. His first astoundingact upon coming amongst us was to present a pair of horses,worth 32,000 francs, to Madame Danglars; his second, thealmost miraculous preservation of Madame de Villefort'slife; now it seems that he has carried off the prize awardedby the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain, in spite ofMorcerf, that not only is the count the object of interestat this present moment, but also that he will continue to beso for a month longer if he pleases to exhibit aneccentricity of conduct which, after all, may be hisordinary mode of existence."

　　"Perhaps you are right," said Morcerf; "meanwhile, who is inthe Russian ambassador's box?"

　　"Which box do you mean?" asked the countess.

　　"The one between the pillars on the first tier -- it seemsto have been fitted up entirely afresh."

　　"Did you observe any one during the first act?" askedChateau-Renaud.

　　"Where?"

　　"In that box."

　　"No," replied the countess, "it was certainly empty duringthe first act;" then, resuming the subject of their previousconversation, she said, "And so you really believe it wasyour mysterious Count of Monte Cristo that gained theprize?"

　　"I am sure of it."

　　"And who afterwards sent the cup to me?"

　　"Undoubtedly."

　　"But I don't know him," said the countess; "I have a greatmind to return it."

　　"Do no such thing, I beg of you; he would only send youanother, formed of a magnificent sapphire, or hollowed outof a gigantic ruby. It is his way, and you must take him asyou find him." At this moment the bell rang to announce thedrawing up of the curtain for the second act. Albert rose toreturn to his place. "Shall I see you again?" asked thecountess. "At the end of the next act, with your permission,I will come and inquire whether there is anything I can dofor you in Paris?"

　　"Pray take notice," said the countess, "that my presentresidence is 22 Rue de Rivoli, and that I am at home to myfriends every Saturday evening. So now, you are bothforewarned." The young men bowed, and quitted the box. Uponreaching their stalls, they found the whole of the audiencein the parterre standing up and directing their gaze towardsthe box formerly possessed by the Russian ambassador. A manof from thirty-five to forty years of age, dressed in deepblack, had just entered, accompanied by a young womandressed after the Eastern style. The lady was surpassinglybeautiful, while the rich magnificence of her attire drewall eyes upon her. "Hullo," said Albert; "it is Monte Cristoand his Greek!"

　　The strangers were, indeed, no other than the count andHaidee. In a few moments the young girl had attracted theattention of the whole house, and even the occupants of theboxes leaned forward to scrutinize her magnificent diamonds.The second act passed away during one continued buzz ofvoices -- one deep whisper -- intimating that some great anduniversally interesting event had occurred; all eyes, allthoughts, were occupied with the young and beautiful woman,whose gorgeous apparel and splendid jewels made a mostextraordinary spectacle. Upon this occasion an unmistakablesign from Madame Danglars intimated her desire to see Albertin her box directly the curtain fell on the second act, andneither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf wouldpermit his neglecting an invitation so unequivocally given.At the close of the act he therefore went to the baroness.Having bowed to the two ladies, he extended his hand toDebray. By the baroness he was most graciously welcomed,while Eugenie received him with her accustomed coldness.

　　"My dear fellow," said Debray, "you have come in the nick oftime. There is madame overwhelming me with questionsrespecting the count; she insists upon it that I can tellher his birth, education, and parentage, where he came from,and whither he is going. Being no disciple of Cagliostro, Iwas wholly unable to do this; so, by way of getting out ofthe scrape, I said, `Ask Morcerf; he has got the wholehistory of his beloved Monte Cristo at his fingers' ends;'whereupon the baroness signified her desire to see you."

　　"Is it not almost incredible," said Madame Danglars, "that aperson having at least half a million of secret-servicemoney at his command, should possess so little information?"

　　"Let me assure you, madame," said Lucien, "that had I reallythe sum you mention at my disposal, I would employ it moreprofitably than in troubling myself to obtain particularsrespecting the Count of Monte Cristo, whose only merit in myeyes consists in his being twice as rich as a nabob.However, I have turned the business over to Morcerf, so praysettle it with him as may be most agreeable to you; for myown part, I care nothing about the count or his mysteriousdoings."

　　"I am very sure no nabob would have sent me a pair of horsesworth 32,000 francs, wearing on their heads four diamondsvalued at 5,000 francs each."

　　"He seems to have a mania for diamonds," said Morcerf,smiling, "and I verily believe that, like Potemkin, he keepshis pockets filled, for the sake of strewing them along theroad, as Tom Thumb did his flint stones."

　　"Perhaps he has discovered some mine," said Madame Danglars."I suppose you know he has an order for unlimited credit onthe baron's banking establishment?"

　　"I was not aware of it," replied Albert, "but I can readilybelieve it."

　　"And, further, that he stated to M. Danglars his intentionof only staying a year in Paris, during which time heproposed to spend six millions.

　　"He must be the Shah of Persia, travelling incog."

　　"Have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young woman,M. Lucien?" inquired Eugenie.

　　"I really never met with one woman so ready to do justice tothe charms of another as yourself," responded Lucien,raising his lorgnette to his eye. "A most lovely creature,upon my soul!" was his verdict.

　　"Who is this young person, M. de Morcerf?" inquired Eugenie;"does anybody know?"

　　"Mademoiselle," said Albert, replying to this direct appeal,"I can give you very exact information on that subject, aswell as on most points relative to the mysterious person ofwhom we are now conversing -- the young woman is a Greek."

　　"So I should suppose by her dress; if you know no more thanthat, every one here is as well-informed as yourself."

　　"I am extremely sorry you find me so ignorant a cicerone,"replied Morcerf, "but I am reluctantly obliged to confess, Ihave nothing further to communicate -- yes, stay, I do knowone thing more, namely, that she is a musician, for one daywhen I chanced to be breakfasting with the count, I heardthe sound of a guzla -- it is impossible that it could havebeen touched by any other finger than her own."

　　"Then your count entertains visitors, does he?" asked MadameDanglars.

　　"Indeed he does, and in a most lavish manner, I can assureyou."

　　"I must try and persuade M. Danglars to invite him to a ballor dinner, or something of the sort, that he may becompelled to ask us in return."

　　"What," said Debray, laughing; "do you really mean you wouldgo to his house?"

　　"Why not? my husband could accompany me."

　　"But do you know this mysterious count is a bachelor?"

　　"You have ample proof to the contrary, if you lookopposite," said the baroness, as she laughingly pointed tothe beautiful Greek.

　　"No, no!" exclaimed Debray; "that girl is not his wife: hetold us himself she was his slave. Do you not recollect,Morcerf, his telling us so at your breakfast?"

　　"Well, then," said the baroness, "if slave she be, she hasall the air and manner of a princess."

　　"Of the `Arabian Nights'?"

　　"If you like; but tell me, my dear Lucien, what it is thatconstitutes a princess. Why, diamonds -- and she is coveredwith them."

　　"To me she seems overloaded," observed Eugenie; "she wouldlook far better if she wore fewer, and we should then beable to see her finely formed throat and wrists."

　　"See how the artist peeps out!" exclaimed Madame Danglars."My poor Eugenie, you must conceal your passion for the finearts."

　　"I admire all that is beautiful," returned the young lady.

　　"What do you think of the count?" inquired Debray; "he isnot much amiss, according to my ideas of good looks."

　　"The count," repeated Eugenie, as though it had not occurredto her to observe him sooner; "the count? -- oh, he is sodreadfully pale."

　　"I quite agree with you," said Morcerf; "and the secret ofthat very pallor is what we want to find out. The CountessG---- insists upon it that he is a vampire."

　　"Then the Countess G---- has returned to Paris, has she?"inquired the baroness.

　　"Is that she, mamma?" asked Eugenie; "almost opposite to us,with that profusion of beautiful light hair?"

　　"Yes," said Madame Danglars, "that is she. Shall I tell youwhat you ought to do, Morcerf?"

　　"Command me, madame."

　　"Well, then, you should go and bring your Count of MonteCristo to us."

　　"What for?" asked Eugenie.

　　"What for? Why, to converse with him, of course. Have youreally no desire to meet him?"

　　"None whatever," replied Eugenie.

　　"Strange child," murmured the baroness.

　　"He will very probably come of his own accord," saidMorcerf. "There; do you see, madame, he recognizes you, andbows." The baroness returned the salute in the most smilingand graceful manner.

　　"Well," said Morcerf, "I may as well be magnanimous, andtear myself away to forward your wishes. Adieu; I will goand try if there are any means of speaking to him."

　　"Go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan."

　　"But I have never been presented."

　　"Presented to whom?"

　　"To the beautiful Greek."

　　"You say she is only a slave?"

　　"While you assert that she is a queen, or at least aprincess. No; I hope that when he sees me leave you, he willcome out."

　　"That is possible -- go."

　　"I am going," said Albert, as he made his parting bow. Justas he was passing the count's box, the door opened, andMonte Cristo came forth. After giving some directions toAli, who stood in the lobby, the count took Albert's arm.Carefully closing the box door, Ali placed himself beforeit, while a crowd of spectators assembled round the Nubian.

　　"Upon my word," said Monte Cristo, "Paris is a strange city,and the Parisians a very singular people. See that clusterof persons collected around poor Ali, who is as muchastonished as themselves; really one might suppose he wasthe only Nubian they had ever beheld. Now I can promise you,that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either inTunis, Constantinople, Bagdad, or Cairo, without beingtreated in that way."

　　"That shows that the Eastern nations have too much goodsense to waste their time and attention on objectsundeserving of either. However, as far as Ali is concerned,I can assure you, the interest he excites is merely from thecircumstance of his being your attendant -- you, who are atthis moment the most celebrated and fashionable person inParis."

　　"Really? and what has procured me so fluttering adistinction?"

　　"What? why, yourself, to be sure! You give away horses wortha thousand louis; you save the lives of ladies of high rankand beauty; under the name of Major Brack you runthoroughbreds ridden by tiny urchins not larger thanmarmots; then, when you have carried off the golden trophyof victory, instead of setting any value on it, you give itto the first handsome woman you think of!"

　　"And who has filled your head with all this nonsense?"

　　"Why, in the first place, I heard it from Madame Danglars,who, by the by, is dying to see you in her box, or to haveyou seen there by others; secondly, I learned it fromBeauchamp's journal; and thirdly, from my own imagination.Why, if you sought concealment, did you call your horseVampa?"

　　"That was an oversight, certainly," replied the count; "buttell me, does the Count of Morcerf never visit the Opera? Ihave been looking for him, but without success."

　　"He will be here to-night."

　　"In what part of the house?"

　　"In the baroness's box, I believe."

　　"That charming young woman with her is her daughter?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I congratulate you." Morcerf smiled. "We will discuss thatsubject at length some future time," said he. "But what doyou think of the music?"

　　"What music?"

　　"Why, the music you have been listening to."

　　"Oh, it is well enough as the production of a humancomposer, sung by featherless bipeds, to quote the lateDiogenes."

　　"From which it would seem, my dear count, that you can atpleasure enjoy the seraphic strains that proceed from theseven choirs of paradise?"

　　"You are right, in some degree; when I wish to listen tosounds more exquisitely attuned to melody than mortal earever yet listened to, I go to sleep."

　　"Then sleep here, my dear count. The conditions arefavorable; what else was opera invented for?"

　　"No, thank you. Your orchestra is too noisy. To sleep afterthe manner I speak of, absolute calm and silence arenecessary, and then a certain preparation" --

　　"I know -- the famous hashish!"

　　"Precisely. So, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to beregaled with music come and sup with me."

　　"I have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting withyou," said Morcerf.

　　"Do you mean at Rome?"

　　"I do."

　　"Ah, then, I suppose you heard Haidee's guzla; the poorexile frequently beguiles a weary hour in playing over to methe airs of her native land." Morcerf did not pursue thesubject, and Monte Cristo himself fell into a silentreverie. The bell rang at this moment for the rising of thecurtain. "You will excuse my leaving you," said the count,turning in the direction of his box.

　　"What? Are you going?"

　　"Pray, say everything that is kind to Countess G---- on thepart of her friend the Vampire."

　　"And what message shall I convey to the baroness!"

　　"That, with her permission, I shall do myself the honor ofpaying my respects in the course of the evening."

　　The third act had begun; and during its progress the Countof Morcerf, according to his promise, made his appearance inthe box of Madame Danglars. The Count of Morcerf was not aperson to excite either interest or curiosity in a place ofpublic amusement; his presence, therefore, was whollyunnoticed, save by the occupants of the box in which he hadjust seated himself. The quick eye of Monte Cristo however,marked his coming; and a slight though meaning smile passedover his lips. Haidee, whose soul seemed centred in thebusiness of the stage, like all unsophisticated natures,delighted in whatever addressed itself to the eye or ear.

　　The third act passed off as usual. Mesdemoiselles Noblet,Julie, and Leroux executed the customary pirouettes; Robertduly challenged the Prince of Granada; and the royal fatherof the princess Isabella, taking his daughter by the hand,swept round the stage with majestic strides, the better todisplay the rich folds of his velvet robe and mantle. Afterwhich the curtain again fell, and the spectators pouredforth from the theatre into the lobbies and salon. The countleft his box, and a moment later was saluting the BaronneDanglars, who could not restrain a cry of mingled pleasureand surprise. "You are welcome, count!" she exclaimed, as heentered. "I have been most anxious to see you, that I mightrepeat orally the thanks writing can so ill express."

　　"Surely so trifling a circumstance cannot deserve a place inyour remembrance. Believe me, madame, I had entirelyforgotten it."

　　"But it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the verynext day after your princely gift you saved the life of mydear friend, Madame de Villefort, which was endangered bythe very animals your generosity restored to me."

　　"This time, at least, I do not deserve your thanks. It wasAli, my Nubian slave, who rendered this service to Madame deVillefort."

　　"Was it Ali," asked the Count of Morcerf, "who rescued myson from the hands of bandits?"

　　"No, count," replied Monte Cristo taking the hand held outto him by the general; "in this instance I may fairly andfreely accept your thanks; but you have already tenderedthem, and fully discharged your debt -- if indeed thereexisted one -- and I feel almost mortified to find you stillreverting to the subject. May I beg of you, baroness, tohonor me with an introduction to your daughter?"

　　"Oh, you are no stranger -- at least not by name," repliedMadame Danglars, "and the last two or three days we havereally talked of nothing but you. Eugenie," continued thebaroness, turning towards her daughter, "this is the Countof Monte Cristo." The Count bowed, while MademoiselleDanglars bent her head slightly. "You have a charming youngperson with you to-night, count," said Eugenie. "Is she yourdaughter?"

　　"No, mademoiselle," said Monte Cristo, astonished at thecoolness and freedom of the question. "She is a poorunfortunate Greek left under my care."

　　"And what is her name?"

　　"Haidee," replied Monte Cristo.

　　"A Greek?" murmured the Count of Morcerf.

　　"Yes, indeed, count," said Madame Danglars; "and tell me,did you ever see at the court of Ali Tepelini, whom you sogloriously and valiantly served, a more exquisite beauty orricher costume?"

　　"Did I hear rightly, monsieur," said Monte Cristo "that youserved at Yanina?"

　　"I was inspector-general of the pasha's troops," repliedMorcerf; "and it is no secret that I owe my fortune, such asit is, to the liberality of the illustrious Albanese chief."

　　"But look!" exclaimed Madame Danglars.

　　"Where?" stammered Morcerf.

　　"There," said Monte Cristo placing his arms around thecount, and leaning with him over the front of the box, justas Haidee, whose eyes were occupied in examining the theatrein search of her guardian, perceived his pale features closeto Morcerf's face. It was as if the young girl beheld thehead of Medusa. She bent forwards as though to assureherself of the reality of what she saw, then, uttering afaint cry, threw herself back in her seat. The sound washeard by the people about Ali, who instantly opened thebox-door. "Why, count," exclaimed Eugenie, "what hashappened to your ward? she seems to have been taken suddenlyill."

　　"Very probably," answered the count. "But do not be alarmedon her account. Haidee's nervous system is delicatelyorganized, and she is peculiarly susceptible to the odorseven of flowers -- nay, there are some which cause her tofaint if brought into her presence. However," continuedMonte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, "I havean infallible remedy." So saying, he bowed to the baronessand her daughter, exchanged a parting shake of the hand withDebray and the count, and left Madame Danglars' box. Uponhis return to Haidee he found her still very pale. As soonas she saw him she seized his hand; her own hands were moistand icy cold. "Who was it you were talking with over there?"she asked.

　　"With the Count of Morcerf," answered Monte Cristo. "Hetells me he served your illustrious father, and that he oweshis fortune to him."

　　"Wretch!" exclaimed Haidee, her eyes flashing with rage; "hesold my father to the Turks, and the fortune he boasts ofwas the price of his treachery! Did not you know that, mydear lord?"

　　"Something of this I heard in Epirus," said Monte Cristo;"but the particulars are still unknown to me. You shallrelate them to me, my child. They are, no doubt, bothcurious and interesting."

　　"Yes, yes; but let us go. I feel as though it would kill meto remain long near that dreadful man." So saying, Haideearose, and wrapping herself in her burnoose of whitecashmire embroidered with pearls and coral, she hastilyquitted the box at the moment when the curtain was risingupon the fourth act.

　　"Do you observe," said the Countess G---- to Albert, whohad returned to her side, "that man does nothing like otherpeople; he listens most devoutly to the third act of `Robertle Diable,' and when the fourth begins, takes hisdeparture."

　　Chapter 54A Flurry in Stocks.

　　Some days after this meeting, Albert de Morcerf visited theCount of Monte Cristo at his house in the Champs Elysees,which had already assumed that palace-like appearance whichthe count's princely fortune enabled him to give even to hismost temporary residences. He came to renew the thanks ofMadame Danglars which had been already conveyed to the countthrough the medium of a letter, signed "Baronne Danglars,nee Hermine de Servieux." Albert was accompanied by LucienDebray, who, joining in his friend's conversation, addedsome passing compliments, the source of which the count'stalent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. He wasconvinced that Lucien's visit was due to a double feeling ofcuriosity, the larger half of which sentiment emanated fromthe Rue de la Chaussee d'Antin. In short, Madame Danglars,not being able personally to examine in detail the domesticeconomy and household arrangements of a man who gave awayhorses worth 30,000 francs and who went to the opera with aGreek slave wearing diamonds to the amount of a million ofmoney, had deputed those eyes, by which she was accustomedto see, to give her a faithful account of the mode of lifeof this incomprehensible person. But the count did notappear to suspect that there could be the slightestconnection between Lucien's visit and the curiosity of thebaroness.

　　"You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?"the count inquired of Albert de Morcerf.

　　"Yes, count, you know what I told you?"

　　"All remains the same, then, in that quarter?"

　　"It is more than ever a settled thing," said Lucien, -- and,considering that this remark was all that he was at thattime called upon to make, he adjusted the glass to his eye,and biting the top of his gold headed cane, began to makethe tour of the apartment, examining the arms and thepictures.

　　"Ah," said Monte Cristo "I did not expect that the affairwould be so promptly concluded."

　　"Oh, things take their course without our assistance. Whilewe are forgetting them, they are falling into theirappointed order; and when, again, our attention is directedto them, we are surprised at the progress they have madetowards the proposed end. My father and M. Danglars servedtogether in Spain, my father in the army and M. Danglars inthe commissariat department. It was there that my father,ruined by the revolution, and M. Danglars, who never hadpossessed any patrimony, both laid the foundations of theirdifferent fortunes."

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo "I think M. Danglars mentioned thatin a visit which I paid him; and," continued he, casting aside-glance at Lucien, who was turning over the leaves of analbum, "Mademoiselle Eugenie is pretty -- I think I rememberthat to be her name."

　　"Very pretty, or rather, very beautiful," replied Albert,"but of that style of beauty which I do not appreciate; I aman ungrateful fellow."

　　"You speak as if you were already her husband."

　　"Ah," returned Albert, in his turn looking around to seewhat Lucien was doing.

　　"Really," said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, "you do notappear to me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of thismarriage."

　　"Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me," replied Morcerf,"and that frightens me."

　　"Bah," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "that's a fine reason togive. Are you not rich yourself?"

　　"My father's income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and hewill give me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when I marry."

　　"That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, inParis especially," said the count; "but everything does notdepend on wealth, and it is a fine thing to have a goodname, and to occupy a high station in society. Your name iscelebrated, your position magnificent; and then the Comte deMorcerf is a soldier, and it is pleasing to see theintegrity of a Bayard united to the poverty of a Duguesclin;disinterestedness is the brightest ray in which a noblesword can shine. As for me, I consider the union withMademoiselle Danglars a most suitable one; she will enrichyou, and you will ennoble her." Albert shook his head, andlooked thoughtful. "There is still something else," said he.

　　"I confess," observed Monte Cristo, "that I have somedifficulty in comprehending your objection to a young ladywho is both rich and beautiful."

　　"Oh," said Morcerf, "this repugnance, if repugnance it maybe called, is not all on my side."

　　"Whence can it arise, then? for you told me your fatherdesired the marriage."

　　"It is my mother who dissents; she has a clear andpenetrating judgment, and does not smile on the proposedunion. I cannot account for it, but she seems to entertainsome prejudice against the Danglars."

　　"Ah," said the count, in a somewhat forced tone, "that maybe easily explained; the Comtesse de Morcerf, who isaristocracy and refinement itself, does not relish the ideaof being allied by your marriage with one of ignoble birth;that is natural enough."

　　"I do not know if that is her reason," said Albert, "but onething I do know, that if this marriage be consummated, itwill render her quite miserable. There was to have been ameeting six weeks ago in order to talk over and settle theaffair; but I had such a sudden attack of indisposition" --

　　"Real?" interrupted the count, smiling.

　　"Oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless, -- at any ratethey postponed the matter for two months. There is no hurry,you know. I am not yet twenty-one, and Eugenie is onlyseventeen; but the two months expire next week. It must bedone. My dear count, you cannot imagine now my mind isharassed. How happy you are in being exempt from all this!"

　　"Well, and why should not you be free, too? What preventsyou from being so?"

　　"Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if Ido not marry Mademoiselle Danglars."

　　"Marry her then," said the count, with a significant shrugof the shoulders.

　　"Yes," replied Morcerf, "but that will plunge my mother intopositive grief."

　　"Then do not marry her," said the count.

　　"Well, I shall see. I will try and think over what is thebest thing to be done; you will give me your advice, willyou not, and if possible extricate me from my unpleasantposition? I think, rather than give pain to my dear mother,I would run the risk of offending the count." Monte Cristoturned away; he seemed moved by this last remark. "Ah," saidhe to Debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chair atthe farthest extremity of the salon, and who held a pencilin his right hand and an account book in his left, "what areyou doing there? Are you making a sketch after Poussin?"

　　"Oh, no," was the tranquil response; "I am too fond of artto attempt anything of that sort. I am doing a little sum inarithmetic."

　　"In arithmetic?"

　　"Yes; I am calculating -- by the way, Morcerf, thatindirectly concerns you -- I am calculating what the houseof Danglars must have gained by the last rise in Haitibonds; from 206 they have risen to 409 in three days, andthe prudent banker had purchased at 206; therefore he musthave made 300,000 livres."

　　"That is not his biggest scoop," said Morcerf; "did he notmake a million in Spaniards this last year?"

　　"My dear fellow," said Lucien, "here is the Count of MonteCristo, who will say to you, as the Italians do, --

　　"`Danaro e santita,Meta della meta.'*

　　* "Money and sanctity,Each in a moiety.

　　"When they tell me such things, I only shrug my shouldersand say nothing."

　　"But you were speaking of Haitians?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Ah, Haitians, -- that is quite another thing! Haitians arethe ecarte of French stock-jobbing. We may like bouillotte,delight in whist, be enraptured with boston, and yet growtired of them all; but we always come back to ecarte -- itis not only a game, it is a hors-d'oeuvre! M. Danglars soldyesterday at 405, and pockets 300,000 francs. Had he butwaited till to-day, the price would have fallen to 205, andinstead of gaining 300,000 francs, he would have lost 20 or25,000."

　　"And what has caused the sudden fall from 409 to 206?" askedMonte Cristo. "I am profoundly ignorant of all thesestock-jobbing intrigues."

　　"Because," said Albert, laughing, "one piece of news followsanother, and there is often great dissimilarity betweenthem."

　　"Ah," said the count, "I see that M. Danglars is accustomedto play at gaining or losing 300,000 francs in a day; hemust be enormously rich."

　　"It is not he who plays!" exclaimed Lucien; "it is MadameDanglars: she is indeed daring."

　　"But you who are a reasonable being, Lucien, and who knowhow little dependence is to be placed on the news, since youare at the fountain-head, surely you ought to prevent it,"said Morcerf, with a smile.

　　"How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?" askedLucien; "you know the character of the baroness -- no onehas any influence with her, and she does precisely what shepleases."

　　"Ah, if I were in your place" -- said Albert.

　　"Well?"

　　"I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to herfuture son-in-law."

　　"How would you set about it?"

　　"Ah, that would be easy enough -- I would give her alesson."

　　"A lesson?"

　　"Yes. Your position as secretary to the minister rendersyour authority great on the subject of political news; younever open your mouth but the stockbrokers immediatelystenograph your words. Cause her to lose a hundred thousandfrancs, and that would teach her prudence."

　　"I do not understand," stammered Lucien.

　　"It is very clear, notwithstanding," replied the young man,with an artlessness wholly free from affectation; "tell hersome fine morning an unheard-of piece of intelligence --some telegraphic despatch, of which you alone are inpossession; for instance, that Henri IV. was seen yesterdayat Gabrielle's. That would boom the market; she will buyheavily, and she will certainly lose when Beauchampannounces the following day, in his gazette, `The reportcirculated by some usually well-informed persons that theking was seen yesterday at Gabrielle's house, is totallywithout foundation. We can positively assert that hismajesty did not quit the Pont-Neuf.'" Lucien half smiled.Monte Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had not lostone word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye hadeven read a hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of thesecretary. This embarrassment had completely escaped Albert,but it caused Lucien to shorten his visit; he was evidentlyill at ease. The count, in taking leave of him, saidsomething in a low voice, to which he answered, "Willingly,count; I accept." The count returned to young Morcerf.

　　"Do you not think, on reflection," said he to him, "that youhave done wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law inthe presence of M. Debray?"

　　"My dear count," said Morcerf, "I beg of you not to applythat title so prematurely."

　　"Now, speaking without any exaggeration, is your motherreally so very much averse to this marriage?"

　　"So much so that the baroness very rarely comes to thehouse, and my mother, has not, I think, visited MadameDanglars twice in her whole life."

　　"Then," said the count, "I am emboldened to speak openly toyou. M. Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort hasoverwhelmed me with politeness in return for a service whicha casual piece of good fortune enabled me to render him. Ipredict from all this an avalanche of dinners and routs.Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to bebeforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thoughtof inviting M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame deVillefort, to my country-house at Auteuil. If I were toinvite you and the Count and Countess of Morcerf to thisdinner, I should give it the appearance of being amatrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf wouldlook upon the affair in that light, especially if BaronDanglars did me the honor to bring his daughter. In thatcase your mother would hold me in aversion, and I do not atall wish that; on the contrary, I desire to stand high inher esteem."

　　"Indeed, count," said Morcerf, "I thank you sincerely forhaving used so much candor towards me, and I gratefullyaccept the exclusion which you propose. You say you desiremy mother's good opinion; I assure you it is already yoursto a very unusual extent."

　　"Do you think so?" said Monte Cristo, with interest.

　　"Oh, I am sure of it; we talked of you an hour after youleft us the other day. But to return to what we were saying.If my mother could know of this attention on your part --and I will venture to tell her -- I am sure that she will bemost grateful to you; it is true that my father will beequally angry." The count laughed. "Well," said he toMorcerf, "but I think your father will not be the only angryone; M. and Madame Danglars will think me a veryill-mannered person. They know that I am intimate with you-- that you are, in fact; one of the oldest of my Parisianacquaintances -- and they will not find you at my house;they will certainly ask me why I did not invite you. Be sureto provide yourself with some previous engagement whichshall have a semblance of probability, and communicate thefact to me by a line in writing. You know that with bankersnothing but a written document will be valid."

　　"I will do better than that," said Albert; "my mother iswishing to go to the sea-side -- what day is fixed for yourdinner?"

　　"Saturday."

　　"This is Tuesday -- well, to-morrow evening we leave, andthe day after we shall be at Treport. Really, count, youhave a delightful way of setting people at their ease."

　　"Indeed, you give me more credit than I deserve; I only wishto do what will be agreeable to you, that is all."

　　"When shall you send your invitations?"

　　"This very day."

　　"Well, I will immediately call on M. Danglars, and tell himthat my mother and myself must leave Paris to-morrow. I havenot seen you, consequently I know nothing of your dinner."

　　"How foolish you are! Have you forgotten that M. Debray hasjust seen you at my house?"

　　"Ah, true,"

　　"Fix it this way. I have seen you, and invited you withoutany ceremony, when you instantly answered that it would beimpossible for you to accept, as you were going to Treport."

　　"Well, then, that is settled; but you will come and call onmy mother before to-morrow?"

　　"Before to-morrow? -- that will be a difficult matter toarrange, besides, I shall just be in the way of all thepreparations for departure."

　　"Well, you can do better. You were only a charming manbefore, but, if you accede to my proposal, you will beadorable."

　　"What must I do to attain such sublimity?"

　　"You are to-day free as air -- come and dine with me; weshall be a small party -- only yourself, my mother, and I.You have scarcely seen my mother; you shall have anopportunity of observing her more closely. She is aremarkable woman, and I only regret that there does notexist another like her, about twenty years younger; in thatcase, I assure you, there would very soon be a Countess andViscountess of Morcerf. As to my father, you will not seehim; he is officially engaged, and dines with the chiefreferendary. We will talk over our travels; and you, whohave seen the whole world, will relate your adventures --you shall tell us the history of the beautiful Greek who waswith you the other night at the Opera, and whom you callyour slave, and yet treat like a princess. We will talkItalian and Spanish. Come, accept my invitation, and mymother will thank you."

　　"A thousand thanks," said the count, "your invitation ismost gracious, and I regret exceedingly that it is not in mypower to accept it. I am not so much at liberty as yousuppose; on the contrary, I have a most importantengagement."

　　"Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in caseof an invitation to dinner, one might creditably make anexcuse. I require the proof of a pre-engagement. I am not abanker, like M. Danglars, but I am quite as incredulous ashe is."

　　"I am going to give you a proof," replied the count, and herang the bell.

　　"Humph," said Morcerf, "this is the second time you haverefused to dine with my mother; it is evident that you wishto avoid her." Monte Cristo started. "Oh, you do not meanthat," said he; "besides, here comes the confirmation of myassertion." Baptistin entered, and remained standing at thedoor. "I had no previous knowledge of your visit, had I?"

　　"Indeed, you are such an extraordinary person, that I wouldnot answer for it."

　　"At all events, I could not guess that you would invite meto dinner."

　　"Probably not."

　　"Well, listen, Baptistin, what did I tell you this morningwhen I called you into my laboratory?"

　　"To close the door against visitors as soon as the clockstruck five," replied the valet.

　　"What then?"

　　"Ah, my dear count," said Albert.

　　"No, no, I wish to do away with that mysterious reputationthat you have given me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome tobe always acting Manfred. I wish my life to be free andopen. Go on, Baptistin."

　　"Then to admit no one except Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti andhis son."

　　"You hear -- Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti -- a man who ranksamongst the most ancient nobility of Italy, whose name Dantehas celebrated in the tenth canto of `The Inferno,' youremember it, do you not? Then there is his son, Andrea, acharming young man, about your own age, viscount, bearingthe same title as yourself, and who is making his entry intothe Parisian world, aided by his father's millions. Themajor will bring his son with him this evening, the contino,as we say in Italy; he confides him to my care. If he proveshimself worthy of it, I will do what I can to advance hisinterests. You will assist me in the work, will you not?"

　　"Most undoubtedly. This Major Cavalcanti is an old friend ofyours, then?"

　　"By no means. He is a perfect nobleman, very polite, modest,and agreeable, such as may be found constantly in Italy,descendants of very ancient families. I have met him severaltimes at Florence, Bologna and Lucca, and he has nowcommunicated to me the fact of his arrival in Paris. Theacquaintances one makes in travelling have a sort of claimon one; they everywhere expect to receive the same attentionwhich you once paid them by chance, as though the civilitiesof a passing hour were likely to awaken any lasting interestin favor of the man in whose society you may happen to bethrown in the course of your journey. This good MajorCavalcanti is come to take a second view of Paris, which heonly saw in passing through in the time of the Empire, whenhe was on his way to Moscow. I shall give him a good dinner,he will confide his son to my care, I will promise to watchover him, I shall let him follow in whatever path his follymay lead him, and then I shall have done my part."

　　"Certainly; I see you are a model Mentor," said Albert"Good-by, we shall return on Sunday. By the way, I havereceived news of Franz."

　　"Have you? Is he still amusing himself in Italy?"

　　"I believe so; however, he regrets your absence extremely .He says you were the sun of Rome, and that without you allappears dark and cloudy; I do not know if he does not evengo so far as to say that it rains."

　　"His opinion of me is altered for the better, then?"

　　"No, he still persists in looking upon you as the mostincomprehensible and mysterious of beings."

　　"He is a charming young man," said Monte Cristo "and I felta lively interest in him the very first evening of myintroduction, when I met him in search of a supper, andprevailed upon him to accept a portion of mine. He is, Ithink, the son of General d'Epinay?"

　　"He is."

　　"The same who was so shamefully assassinated in 1815?"

　　"By the Bonapartists."

　　"Yes. Really I like him extremely; is there not also amatrimonial engagement contemplated for him?"

　　"Yes, he is to marry Mademoiselle de Villefort."

　　"Indeed?"

　　"And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars," saidAlbert, laughing.

　　"You smile."

　　"Yes."

　　"Why do you do so?"

　　"I smile because there appears to me to be about as muchinclination for the consummation of the engagement inquestion as there is for my own. But really, my dear count,we are talking as much of women as they do of us; it isunpardonable." Albert rose.

　　"Are you going?"

　　"Really, that is a good idea! -- two hours have I beenboring you to death with my company, and then you, with thegreatest politeness, ask me if I am going. Indeed, count,you are the most polished man in the world. And yourservants, too, how very well behaved they are; there isquite a style about them. Monsieur Baptistin especially; Icould never get such a man as that. My servants seem toimitate those you sometimes see in a play, who, because theyhave only a word or two to say, aquit themselves in the mostawkward manner possible. Therefore, if you part with M.Baptistin, give me the refusal of him."

　　"By all means."

　　"That is not all; give my compliments to your illustriousLuccanese, Cavalcante of the Cavalcanti; and if by anychance he should be wishing to establish his son, find him awife very rich, very noble on her mother's side at least,and a baroness in right of her father, I will help you inthe search."

　　"Ah, ha; you will do as much as that, will you?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, really, nothing is certain in this world."

　　"Oh, count, what a service you might render me! I shouldlike you a hundred times better if, by your intervention, Icould manage to remain a bachelor, even were it only for tenyears."

　　"Nothing is impossible," gravely replied Monte Cristo; andtaking leave of Albert, he returned into the house, andstruck the gong three times. Bertuccio appeared. "MonsieurBertuccio, you understand that I intend entertaining companyon Saturday at Auteuil." Bertuccio slightly started. "Ishall require your services to see that all be properlyarranged. It is a beautiful house, or at all events may bemade so."

　　"There must be a good deal done before it can deserve thattitle, your excellency, for the tapestried hangings are veryold."

　　"Let them all be taken away and changed, then, with theexception of the sleeping-chamber which is hung with reddamask; you will leave that exactly as it is." Bertucciobowed. "You will not touch the garden either; as to theyard, you may do what you please with it; I should preferthat being altered beyond all recognition."

　　"I will do everything in my power to carry out your wishes,your excellency. I should be glad, however, to receive yourexcellency's commands concerning the dinner."

　　"Really, my dear M. Bertuccio," said the count, "since youhave been in Paris, you have become quite nervous, andapparently out of your element; you no longer seem tounderstand me."

　　"But surely your excellency will be so good as to inform mewhom you are expecting to receive?"

　　"I do not yet know myself, neither is it necessary that youshould do so. `Lucullus dines with Lucullus,' that is quitesufficient." Bertuccio bowed, and left the room.

　　Chapter 55Major Cavalcanti.

　　Both the count and Baptistin had told the truth when theyannounced to Morcerf the proposed visit of the major, whichhad served Monte Cristo as a pretext for declining Albert'sinvitation. Seven o'clock had just struck, and M. Bertuccio,according to the command which had been given him, had twohours before left for Auteuil, when a cab stopped at thedoor, and after depositing its occupant at the gate,immediately hurried away, as if ashamed of its employment.The visitor was about fifty-two years of age, dressed in oneof the green surtouts, ornamented with black frogs, whichhave so long maintained their popularity all over Europe. Hewore trousers of blue cloth, boots tolerably clean, but notof the brightest polish, and a little too thick in thesoles, buckskin gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in shapethose usually worn by the gendarmes, and a black cravatstriped with white, which, if the proprietor had not worn itof his own free will, might have passed for a halter, somuch did it resemble one. Such was the picturesque costumeof the person who rang at the gate, and demanded if it wasnot at No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Elysees that theCount of Monte Cristo lived, and who, being answered by theporter in the affirmative, entered, closed the gate afterhim, and began to ascend the steps.

　　The small and angular head of this man, his white hair andthick gray mustaches, caused him to be easily recognized byBaptistin, who had received an exact description of theexpected visitor, and who was awaiting him in the hall.Therefore, scarcely had the stranger time to pronounce hisname before the count was apprised of his arrival. He wasushered into a simple and elegant drawing-room, and thecount rose to meet him with a smiling air. "Ah, my dear sir,you are most welcome; I was expecting you."

　　"Indeed," said the Italian, "was your excellency then awareof my visit?"

　　"Yes; I had been told that I should see you to-day at seveno'clock."

　　"Then you have received full information concerning myarrival?"

　　"Of course."

　　"Ah, so much the better, I feared this little precautionmight have been forgotten."

　　"What precaution?"

　　"That of informing you beforehand of my coming."

　　"Oh, no, it has not."

　　"But you are sure you are not mistaken."

　　"Very sure."

　　"It really was I whom your excellency expected at seveno'clock this evening?"

　　"I will prove it to you beyond a doubt."

　　"Oh, no, never mind that," said the Italian; "it is notworth the trouble."

　　"Yes, yes," said Monte Cristo. His visitor appeared slightlyuneasy. "Let me see," said the count; "are you not theMarquis Bartolomeo Cavalcanti?"

　　"Bartolomeo Cavalcanti," joyfully replied the Italian; "yes,I am really he."

　　"Ex-major in the Austrian service?"

　　"Was I a major?" timidly asked the old soldier.

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo "you were a major; that is thetitle the French give to the post which you filled inItaly."

　　"Very good," said the major, "I do not demand more, youunderstand" --

　　"Your visit here to-day is not of your own suggestion, isit?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"No, certainly not."

　　"You were sent by some other person?"

　　"Yes."

　　"By the excellent Abbe Busoni?"

　　"Exactly so," said the delighted major.

　　"And you have a letter?"

　　"Yes, there it is."

　　"Give it me, then;" and Monte Cristo took the letter, whichhe opened and read. The major looked at the count with hislarge staring eyes, and then took a survey of the apartment,but his gaze almost immediately reverted to the proprietorof the room. "Yes, yes, I see. `Major Cavalcanti, a worthypatrician of Lucca, a descendant of the Cavalcanti ofFlorence,'" continued Monte Cristo, reading aloud,"`possessing an income of half a million.'" Monte Cristoraised his eyes from the paper, and bowed. "Half a million,"said he, "magnificent!"

　　"Half a million, is it?" said the major.

　　"Yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbeknows correctly the amount of all the largest fortunes inEurope."

　　"Be it half a million. then; but on my word of honor, I hadno idea that it was so much."

　　"Because you are robbed by your steward. You must make somereformation in that quarter."

　　"You have opened my eyes," said the Italian gravely; "I willshow the gentlemen the door." Monte Cristo resumed theperusal of the letter: --

　　"`And who only needs one thing more to make him happy.'"

　　"Yes, indeed but one!" said the major with a sigh.

　　"`Which is to recover a lost and adored son.'"

　　"A lost and adored son!"

　　"`Stolen away in his infancy, either by an enemy of hisnoble family or by the gypsies.'"

　　"At the age of five years!" said the major with a deep sigh,and raising his eye to heaven.

　　"Unhappy father," said Monte Cristo. The count continued: --

　　"`I have given him renewed life and hope, in the assurancethat you have the power of restoring the son whom he hasvainly sought for fifteen years.'" The major looked at thecount with an indescribable expression of anxiety. "I havethe power of so doing," said Monte Cristo. The majorrecovered his self-possession. "So, then," said he, "theletter was true to the end?"

　　"Did you doubt it, my dear Monsieur Bartolomeo?"

　　"No, indeed; certainly not; a good man, a man holdingreligious office, as does the Abbe Busoni, could notcondescend to deceive or play off a joke; but yourexcellency has not read all."

　　"Ah, true," said Monte Cristo "there is a postscript."

　　"Yes, yes," repeated the major, "yes -- there -- is -- a --postscript."

　　"`In order to save Major Cavalcanti the trouble of drawingon his banker, I send him a draft for 2,000 francs to defrayhis travelling expenses, and credit on you for the furthersum of 48,000 francs, which you still owe me.'" The majorawaited the conclusion of the postscript, apparently withgreat anxiety. "Very good," said the count.

　　"He said `very good,'" muttered the major, "then -- sir" --replied he.

　　"Then what?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"Then the postscript" --

　　"Well; what of the postscript?"

　　"Then the postscript is as favorably received by you as therest of the letter?"

　　"Certainly; the Abbe Busoni and myself have a small accountopen between us. I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000francs, which I am still owing him, but I dare say we shallnot dispute the difference. You attached great importance,then, to this postscript, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti?"

　　"I must explain to you," said the major, "that, fullyconfiding in the signature of the Abbe Busoni, I had notprovided myself with any other funds; so that if thisresource had failed me, I should have found myself veryunpleasantly situated in Paris."

　　"Is it possible that a man of your standing should beembarrassed anywhere?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Why, really I know no one," said the major.

　　"But then you yourself are known to others?"

　　"Yes, I am known, so that" --

　　"Proceed, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti."

　　"So that you will remit to me these 48,000 francs?"

　　"Certainly, at your first request." The major's eyes dilatedwith pleasing astonishment. "But sit down," said MonteCristo; "really I do not know what I have been thinking of-- I have positively kept you standing for the last quarterof an hour."

　　"Don't mention it." The major drew an arm-chair towards him,and proceeded to seat himself.

　　"Now," said the count, "what will you take -- a glass ofport, sherry, or Alicante?"

　　"Alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine."

　　"I have some that is very good. You will take a biscuit withit, will you not?"

　　"Yes, I will take a biscuit, as you are so obliging."

　　Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared. The count advanced tomeet him. "Well?" said he in a low voice. "The young man ishere," said the valet de chambre in the same tone.

　　"Into what room did you take him?"

　　"Into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency'sorders."

　　"That's right; now bring the Alicante and some biscuits."

　　Baptistin left the room. "Really," said the major, "I amquite ashamed of the trouble I am giving you."

　　"Pray don't mention such a thing," said the count. Baptistinre-entered with glasses, wine, and biscuits. The countfilled one glass, but in the other he only poured a fewdrops of the ruby-colored liquid. The bottle was coveredwith spiders' webs, and all the other signs which indicatethe age of wine more truly than do wrinkles on a man's face.The major made a wise choice; he took the full glass and abiscuit. The count told Baptistin to leave the plate withinreach of his guest, who began by sipping the Alicante withan expression of great satisfaction, and then delicatelysteeped his biscuit in the wine.

　　"So, sir, you lived at Lucca, did you? You were rich, noble,held in great esteem -- had all that could render a manhappy?"

　　"All," said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit,"positively all."

　　"And yet there was one thing wanting in order to completeyour happiness?"

　　"Only one thing," said the Italian.

　　"And that one thing, your lost child."

　　"Ah," said the major, taking a second biscuit, "thatconsummation of my happiness was indeed wanting." The worthymajor raised his eyes to heaven and sighed.

　　"Let me hear, then," said the count, "who this deeplyregretted son was; for I always understood you were abachelor."

　　"That was the general opinion, sir," said the major, "and I"--

　　"Yes," replied the count, "and you confirmed the report. Ayouthful indiscretion, I suppose, which you were anxious toconceal from the world at large?" The major recoveredhimself, and resumed his usual calm manner, at the same timecasting his eyes down, either to give himself time tocompose his countenance, or to assist his imagination, allthe while giving an under-look at the count, the protractedsmile on whose lips still announced the same politecuriosity. "Yes," said the major, "I did wish this fault tobe hidden from every eye."

　　"Not on your own account, surely," replied Monte Cristo;"for a man is above that sort of thing?"

　　"Oh, no, certainly not on my own account," said the majorwith a smile and a shake of the head.

　　"But for the sake of the mother?" said the count.

　　"Yes, for the mother's sake -- his poor mother!" cried themajor, taking a third biscuit.

　　"Take some more wine, my dear Cavalcanti," said the count,pouring out for him a second glass of Alicante; "youremotion has quite overcome you."

　　"His poor mother," murmured the major, trying to get thelachrymal gland in operation, so as to moisten the corner ofhis eye with a false tear.

　　"She belonged to one of the first families in Italy, Ithink, did she not?"

　　"She was of a noble family of Fiesole, count."

　　"And her name was" --

　　"Do you desire to know her name?" --

　　"Oh," said Monte Cristo "it would be quite superfluous foryou to tell me, for I already know it."

　　"The count knows everything," said the Italian, bowing.

　　"Oliva Corsinari, was it not?"

　　"Oliva Corsinari."

　　"A marchioness?"

　　"A marchioness."

　　"And you married her at last, notwithstanding the oppositionof her family?"

　　"Yes, that was the way it ended."

　　"And you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?"said Monte Cristo.

　　"What papers?"

　　"The certificate of your marriage with Oliva Corsinari, andthe register of your child's birth."

　　"The register of my child's birth?"

　　"The register of the birth of Andrea Cavalcanti -- of yourson; is not his name Andrea?"

　　"I believe so," said the major.

　　"What? You believe so?"

　　"I dare not positively assert it, as he has been lost for solong a time."

　　"Well, then," said Monte Cristo "you have all the documentswith you?"

　　"Your excellency, I regret to say that, not knowing it wasnecessary to come provided with these papers, I neglected tobring them."

　　"That is unfortunate," returned Monte Cristo.

　　"Were they, then, so necessary?"

　　"They were indispensable."

　　The major passed his hand across his brow. "Ah, per Bacco,indispensable, were they?"

　　"Certainly they were; supposing there were to be doubtsraised as to the validity of your marriage or the legitimacyof your child?"

　　"True," said the major, "there might be doubts raised."

　　"In that case your son would be very unpleasantly situated."

　　"It would be fatal to his interests."

　　"It might cause him to fail in some desirable matrimonialalliance."

　　"O peccato!"

　　"You must know that in France they are very particular onthese points; it is not sufficient, as in Italy, to go tothe priest and say, `We love each other, and want you tomarry us.' Marriage is a civil affair in France, and inorder to marry in an orthodox manner you must have paperswhich undeniably establish your identity."

　　"That is the misfortune! You see I have not these necessarypapers."

　　"Fortunately, I have them, though," said Monte Cristo.

　　"You?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You have them?"

　　"I have them."

　　"Ah, indeed?" said the major, who, seeing the object of hisjourney frustrated by the absence of the papers, feared alsothat his forgetfulness might give rise to some difficultyconcerning the 48,000 francs -- "ah, indeed, that is afortunate circumstance; yes, that really is lucky, for itnever occurred to me to bring them."

　　"I do not at all wonder at it -- one cannot think ofeverything; but, happily, the Abbe Busoni thought for you."

　　"He is an excellent person."

　　"He is extremely prudent and thoughtful"

　　"He is an admirable man," said the major; "and he sent themto you?"

　　"Here they are."

　　The major clasped his hands in token of admiration. "Youmarried Oliva Corsinari in the church of San Paolo delMonte-Cattini; here is the priest's certificate."

　　"Yes indeed, there it is truly," said the Italian, lookingon with astonishment.

　　"And here is Andrea Cavalcanti's baptismal register, givenby the curate of Saravezza."

　　"All quite correct."

　　"Take these documents, then; they do not concern me. Youwill give them to your son, who will, of course, take greatcare of them."

　　"I should think so, indeed! If he were to lose them" --

　　"Well, and if he were to lose them?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"In that case," replied the major, "it would be necessary towrite to the curate for duplicates, and it would be sometime before they could be obtained."

　　"It would be a difficult matter to arrange," said MonteCristo.

　　"Almost an impossibility," replied the major.

　　"I am very glad to see that you understand the value ofthese papers."

　　"I regard them as invaluable."

　　"Now," said Monte Cristo "as to the mother of the young man"--

　　"As to the mother of the young man" -- repeated the Italian,with anxiety.

　　"As regards the Marchesa Corsinari" --

　　"Really," said the major, "difficulties seem to thicken uponus; will she be wanted in any way?"

　　"No, sir," replied Monte Cristo; "besides, has she not" --

　　"Yes, sir," said the major, "she has" --

　　"Paid the last debt of nature?"

　　"Alas, yes," returned the Italian.

　　"I knew that," said Monte Cristo; "she has been dead theseten years."

　　"And I am still mourning her loss," exclaimed the major,drawing from his pocket a checked handkerchief, andalternately wiping first the left and then the right eye.

　　"What would you have?" said Monte Cristo; "we are allmortal. Now, you understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti,that it is useless for you to tell people in France that youhave been separated from your son for fifteen years. Storiesof gypsies, who steal children, are not at all in vogue inthis part of the world, and would not be believed. You senthim for his education to a college in one of the provinces,and now you wish him to complete his education in theParisian world. That is the reason which has induced you toleave Via Reggio, where you have lived since the death ofyour wife. That will be sufficient."

　　"You think so?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"Very well, then."

　　"If they should hear of the separation" --

　　"Ah, yes; what could I say?"

　　"That an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies ofyour family" --

　　"By the Corsinari?"

　　"Precisely. Had stolen away this child, in order that yourname might become extinct."

　　"That is reasonable, since he is an only son."

　　"Well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newlyawakened remembrances be forgotten. You have, doubtless,already guessed that I was preparing a surprise for you?"

　　"An agreeable one?" asked the Italian.

　　"Ah, I see the eye of a father is no more to be deceivedthan his heart."

　　"Hum!" said the major.

　　"Some one has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessedthat he was here."

　　"That who was here?"

　　"Your child -- your son -- your Andrea!"

　　"I did guess it," replied the major with the greatestpossible coolness. "Then he is here?"

　　"He is," said Monte Cristo; "when the valet de chambre camein just now, he told me of his arrival."

　　"Ah, very well, very well," said the major, clutching thebuttons of his coat at each exclamation.

　　"My dear sir," said Monte Cristo, "I understand youremotion; you must have time to recover yourself. I will, inthe meantime, go and prepare the young man for thismuch-desired interview, for I presume that he is not lessimpatient for it than yourself."

　　"I should quite imagine that to be the case," saidCavalcanti.

　　"Well, in a quarter of an hour he shall be with you."

　　"You will bring him, then? You carry your goodness so far aseven to present him to me yourself?"

　　"No; I do not wish to come between a father and son. Yourinterview will be private. But do not be uneasy; even if thepowerful voice of nature should be silent, you cannot wellmistake him; he will enter by this door. He is a fine youngman, of fair complexion -- a little too fair, perhaps --pleasing in manners; but you will see and judge foryourself."

　　"By the way," said the major, "you know I have only the2,000 francs which the Abbe Busoni sent me; this sum I haveexpended upon travelling expenses, and" --

　　"And you want money; that is a matter of course, my dear M.Cavalcanti. Well, here are 8,000 francs on account."

　　The major's eyes sparkled brilliantly.

　　"It is 40,000 francs which I now owe you," said MonteCristo.

　　"Does your excellency wish for a receipt?" said the major,at the same time slipping the money into the inner pocket ofhis coat.

　　"For what?" said the count.

　　"I thought you might want it to show the Abbe Busoni."

　　"Well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall giveme a receipt in full. Between honest men such excessiveprecaution is, I think, quite unnecessary."

　　"Yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people."

　　"One word more," said Monte Cristo.

　　"Say on."

　　"You will permit me to make one remark?"

　　"Certainly; pray do so."

　　"Then I should advise you to leave off wearing that style ofdress."

　　"Indeed," said the major, regarding himself with an air ofcomplete satisfaction.

　　"Yes. It may be worn at Via Reggio; but that costume,however elegant in itself, has long been out of fashion inParis."

　　"That's unfortunate."

　　"Oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress;you can easily resume it when you leave Paris."

　　"But what shall I wear?"

　　"What you find in your trunks."

　　"In my trunks? I have but one portmanteau."

　　"I dare say you have nothing else with you. What is the useof boring one's self with so many things? Besides an oldsoldier always likes to march with as little baggage aspossible."

　　"That is just the case -- precisely so."

　　"But you are a man of foresight and prudence, therefore yousent your luggage on before you. It has arrived at the Hoteldes Princes, Rue de Richelieu. It is there you are to takeup your quarters."

　　"Then, in these trunks" --

　　"I presume you have given orders to your valet de chambre toput in all you are likely to need, -- your plain clothes andyour uniform. On grand occasions you must wear your uniform;that will look very well. Do not forget your crosses. Theystill laugh at them in France, and yet always wear them, forall that."

　　"Very well, very well," said the major, who was in ecstasyat the attention paid him by the count.

　　"Now," said Monte Cristo, "that you have fortified yourselfagainst all painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M.Cavalcanti, to meet your lost Andrea." Saying which MonteCristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry, leavingthe major fascinated beyond expression with the delightfulreception which he had received at the hands of the count.

　　Chapter 56Andrea Cavalcanti.

　　The Count of Monte Cristo entered the adjoining room, whichBaptistin had designated as the drawing-room, and foundthere a young man, of graceful demeanor and elegantappearance, who had arrived in a cab about half an hourpreviously. Baptistin had not found any difficulty inrecognizing the person who presented himself at the door foradmittance. He was certainly the tall young man with lighthair, red heard, black eyes, and brilliant complexion, whomhis master had so particularly described to him. When thecount entered the room the young man was carelesslystretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the gold-headedcane which he held in his hand. On perceiving the count herose quickly. "The Count of Monte Cristo, I believe?" saidhe.

　　"Yes, sir, and I think I have the honor of addressing CountAndrea Cavalcanti?"

　　"Count Andrea Cavalcanti," repeated the young man,accompanying his words with a bow.

　　"You are charged with a letter of introduction addressed tome, are you not?" said the count.

　　"I did not mention that, because the signature seemed to meso strange."

　　"The letter signed `Sinbad the Sailor,' is it not?"

　　"Exactly so. Now, as I have never known any Sinbad, with theexception of the one celebrated in the `Thousand and OneNights'" --

　　"Well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend ofmine; he is a very rich Englishman, eccentric almost toinsanity, and his real name is Lord Wilmore."

　　"Ah, indeed? Then that explains everything that isextraordinary," said Andrea. "He is, then, the sameEnglishman whom I met -- at -- ah -- yes, indeed. Well,monsieur, I am at your service."

　　"If what you say be true," replied the count, smiling,"perhaps you will be kind enough to give me some account ofyourself and your family?"

　　"Certainly, I will do so," said the young man, with aquickness which gave proof of his ready invention. "I am (asyou have said) the Count Andrea Cavalcanti, son of MajorBartolomeo Cavalcanti, a descendant of the Cavalcanti whosenames are inscribed in the golden book at Florence. Ourfamily, although still rich (for my father's income amountsto half a million), has experienced many misfortunes, and Imyself was, at the age of five years, taken away by thetreachery of my tutor, so that for fifteen years I have notseen the author of my existence. Since I have arrived atyears of discretion and become my own master, I have beenconstantly seeking him, but all in vain. At length Ireceived this letter from your friend, which states that myfather is in Paris, and authorizes me to address myself toyou for information respecting him."

　　"Really, all you have related to me is exceedinglyinteresting," said Monte Cristo, observing the young manwith a gloomy satisfaction; "and you have done well toconform in everything to the wishes of my friend Sinbad; foryour father is indeed here, and is seeking you."

　　The count from the moment of first entering thedrawing-room, had not once lost sight of the expression ofthe young man's countenance; he had admired the assurance ofhis look and the firmness of his voice; but at these words,so natural in themselves, "Your father is indeed here, andis seeking you," young Andrea started, and exclaimed, "Myfather? Is my father here?"

　　"Most undoubtedly," replied Monte Cristo; "your father,Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti." The expression of terrorwhich, for the moment, had overspread the features of theyoung man, had now disappeared. "Ah, yes, that is the name,certainly. Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti. And you really meanto say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?"

　　"Yes, sir; and I can even add that I have only just left hiscompany. The history which he related to me of his lost sontouched me to the quick; indeed, his griefs, hopes, andfears on that subject might furnish material for a mosttouching and pathetic poem. At length, he one day received aletter, stating that the abductors of his son now offered torestore him, or at least to give notice where he might befound, on condition of receiving a large sum of money, byway of ransom. Your father did not hesitate an instant, andthe sum was sent to the frontier of Piedmont, with apassport signed for Italy. You were in the south of France,I think?"

　　"Yes," replied Andrea, with an embarrassed air, "I was inthe south of France."

　　"A carriage was to await you at Nice?"

　　"Precisely so; and it conveyed me from Nice to Genoa, fromGenoa to Turin, from Turin to Chambery, from Chambery toPont-de-Beauvoisin, and from Pont-de-Beauvoisin to Paris."

　　"Indeed? Then your father ought to have met with you on theroad, for it is exactly the same route which he himselftook, and that is how we have been able to trace yourjourney to this place."

　　"But," said Andrea, "if my father had met me, I doubt if hewould have recognized me; I must be somewhat altered sincehe last saw me."

　　"Oh, the voice of nature," said Monte Cristo.

　　"True," interrupted the young man, "I had not looked upon itin that light."

　　"Now," replied Monte Cristo "there is only one source ofuneasiness left in your father's mind, which is this -- heis anxious to know how you have been employed during yourlong absence from him, how you have been treated by yourpersecutors, and if they have conducted themselves towardsyou with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he isanxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escapethe bad moral influence to which you have been exposed, andwhich is infinitely more to be dreaded than any physicalsuffering; he wishes to discover if the fine abilities withwhich nature had endowed you have been weakened by want ofculture; and, in short, whether you consider yourselfcapable of resuming and retaining in the world the highposition to which your rank entitles you."

　　"Sir!" exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, "I hope nofalse report" --

　　"As for myself, I first heard you spoken of by my friendWilmore, the philanthropist. I believe he found you in someunpleasant position, but do not know of what nature, for Idid not ask, not being inquisitive. Your misfortunes engagedhis sympathies, so you see you must have been interesting.He told me that he was anxious to restore you to theposition which you had lost, and that he would seek yourfather until he found him. He did seek, and has found him,apparently, since he is here now; and, finally, my friendapprised me of your coming, and gave me a few otherinstructions relative to your future fortune. I am quiteaware that my friend Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere,and as rich as a gold-mine, consequently, he may indulge hiseccentricities without any fear of their ruining him, and Ihave promised to adhere to his instructions. Now, sir, praydo not be offended at the question I am about to put to you,as it comes in the way of my duty as your patron. I wouldwish to know if the misfortunes which have happened to you-- misfortunes entirely beyond your control, and which in nodegree diminish my regard for you -- I would wish to know ifthey have not, in some measure, contributed to render you astranger to the world in which your fortune and your nameentitle you to make a conspicuous figure?"

　　"Sir," returned the young man, with a reassurance of manner,"make your mind easy on this score. Those who took me frommy father, and who always intended, sooner or later, to sellme again to my original proprietor, as they have now done,calculated that, in order to make the most of their bargain,it would be politic to leave me in possession of all mypersonal and hereditary worth, and even to increase thevalue, if possible. I have, therefore, received a very goodeducation, and have been treated by these kidnappers verymuch as the slaves were treated in Asia Minor, whose mastersmade them grammarians, doctors, and philosophers, in orderthat they might fetch a higher price in the Roman market."Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if hehad not expected so much from M. Andrea Cavalcanti."Besides," continued the young man, "if there did appearsome defect in education, or offence against the establishedforms of etiquette, I suppose it would be excused, inconsideration of the misfortunes which accompanied my birth,and followed me through my youth."

　　"Well," said Monte Cristo in an indifferent tone, "you willdo as you please, count, for you are the master of your ownactions, and are the person most concerned in the matter,but if I were you, I would not divulge a word of theseadventures. Your history is quite a romance, and the world,which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangelymistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, eventhough they be gilded like yourself. This is the kind ofdifficulty which I wished to represent to you, my dearcount. You would hardly have recited your touching historybefore it would go forth to the world, and be deemedunlikely and unnatural. You would be no longer a lost childfound, but you would be looked upon as an upstart, who hadsprung up like a mushroom in the night. You might excite alittle curiosity, but it is not every one who likes to bemade the centre of observation and the subject of unpleasantremark."

　　"I agree with you, monsieur," said the young man, turningpale, and, in spite of himself, trembling beneath thescrutinizing look of his companion, "such consequences wouldbe extremely unpleasant."

　　"Nevertheless, you must not exaggerate the evil," said MonteCristo, "for by endeavoring to avoid one fault you will fallinto another. You must resolve upon one simple and singleline of conduct, and for a man of your intelligence, thisplan is as easy as it is necessary; you must form honorablefriendships, and by that means counteract the prejudicewhich may attach to the obscurity of your former life."Andrea visibly changed countenance. "I would offer myself asyour surety and friendly adviser," said Monte Cristo, "did Inot possess a moral distrust of my best friends, and a sortof inclination to lead others to doubt them too; therefore,in departing from this rule, I should (as the actors say) beplaying a part quite out of my line, and should, therefore,run the risk of being hissed, which would be an act offolly."

　　"However, your excellency," said Andrea, "in considerationof Lord Wilmore, by whom I was recommended to you -- "

　　"Yes, certainly," interrupted Monte Cristo; "but LordWilmore did not omit to inform me, my dear M. Andrea, thatthe season of your youth was rather a stormy one. Ah," saidthe count, watching Andrea's countenance, "I do not demandany confession from you; it is precisely to avoid thatnecessity that your father was sent for from Lucca. Youshall soon see him. He is a little stiff and pompous in hismanner, and he is disfigured by his uniform; but when itbecomes known that he has been for eighteen years in theAustrian service, all that will be pardoned. We are notgenerally very severe with the Austrians. In short, you willfind your father a very presentable person, I assure you."

　　"Ah, sir, you have given me confidence; it is so long sincewe were separated, that I have not the least remembrance ofhim, and, besides, you know that in the eyes of the world alarge fortune covers all defects."

　　"He is a millionaire -- his income is 500,000 francs."

　　"Then," said the young man, with anxiety, "I shall be sureto be placed in an agreeable position."

　　"One of the most agreeable possible, my dear sir; he willallow you an income of 50,000 livres per annum during thewhole time of your stay in Paris."

　　"Then in that case I shall always choose to remain there."

　　"You cannot control circumstances, my dear sir; `manproposes, and God disposes.'" Andrea sighed. "But," said he,"so long as I do remain in Paris, and nothing forces me toquit it, do you mean to tell me that I may rely on receivingthe sum you just now mentioned to me?"

　　"You may."

　　"Shall I receive it from my father?" asked Andrea, with someuneasiness.

　　"Yes, you will receive it from your father personally, butLord Wilmore will be the security for the money. He has, atthe request of your father, opened an account of 6,000francs a month at M. Danglars', which is one of the safestbanks in Paris."

　　"And does my father mean to remain long in Paris?" askedAndrea.

　　"Only a few days," replied Monte Cristo. "His service doesnot allow him to absent himself more than two or three weekstogether."

　　"Ah, my dear father!" exclaimed Andrea, evidently charmedwith the idea of his speedy departure.

　　"Therefore," said Monte Cristo feigning to mistake hismeaning -- "therefore I will not, for another instant,retard the pleasure of your meeting. Are you prepared toembrace your worthy father?"

　　"I hope you do not doubt it."

　　"Go, then, into the drawing-room, my young friend, where youwill find your father awaiting you." Andrea made a low bowto the count, and entered the adjoining room. Monte Cristowatched him till he disappeared, and then touched a springin a panel made to look like a picture, which, in slidingpartly from the frame, discovered to view a small opening,so cleverly contrived that it revealed all that was passingin the drawing-room now occupied by Cavalcanti and Andrea.The young man closed the door behind him, and advancedtowards the major, who had risen when he heard stepsapproaching him. "Ah, my dear father!" said Andrea in a loudvoice, in order that the count might hear him in the nextroom, "is it really you?"

　　"How do you do, my dear son?" said the major gravely.

　　"After so many years of painful separation," said Andrea, inthe same tone of voice, and glancing towards the door, "whata happiness it is to meet again!"

　　"Indeed it is, after so long a separation."

　　"Will you not embrace me, sir?" said Andrea.

　　"If you wish it, my son," said the major; and the two menembraced each other after the fashion of actors on thestage; that is to say, each rested his head on the other'sshoulder.

　　"Then we are once more reunited?" said Andrea.

　　"Once more," replied the major.

　　"Never more to be separated?"

　　"Why, as to that -- I think, my dear son, you must be bythis time so accustomed to France as to look upon it almostas a second country."

　　"The fact is," said the young man, "that I should beexceedingly grieved to leave it."

　　"As for me, you must know I cannot possibly live out ofLucca; therefore I shall return to Italy as soon as I can."

　　"But before you leave France, my dear father, I hope youwill put me in possession of the documents which will benecessary to prove my descent."

　　"Certainly; I am come expressly on that account; it has costme much trouble to find you, but I had resolved on givingthem into your hands, and if I had to recommence my search,it would occupy all the few remaining years of my life."

　　"Where are these papers, then?"

　　"Here they are."

　　Andrea seized the certificate of his father's marriage andhis own baptismal register, and after having opened themwith all the eagerness which might be expected under thecircumstances, he read them with a facility which provedthat he was accustomed to similar documents, and with anexpression which plainly denoted an unusual interest in thecontents. When he had perused the documents, an indefinableexpression of pleasure lighted up his countenance, andlooking at the major with a most peculiar smile, he said, invery excellent Tuscan, -- "Then there is no longer any suchthing, in Italy as being condemned to the galleys?" Themajor drew himself up to his full height.

　　"Why? -- what do you mean by that question?"

　　"I mean that if there were, it would be impossible to drawup with impunity two such deeds as these. In France, my dearsir, half such a piece of effrontery as that would cause youto be quickly despatched to Toulon for five years, forchange of air."

　　"Will you be good enough to explain your meaning?" said themajor, endeavoring as much as possible to assume an air ofthe greatest majesty.

　　"My dear M. Cavalcanti," said Andrea, taking the major bythe arm in a confidential manner, "how much are you paid forbeing my father?" The major was about to speak, when Andreacontinued, in a low voice.

　　"Nonsense, I am going to set you an example of confidence,they give me 50,000 francs a year to be your son;consequently, you can understand that it is not at alllikely I shall ever deny my parent." The major lookedanxiously around him. "Make yourself easy, we are quitealone," said Andrea; "besides, we are conversing inItalian."

　　"Well, then," replied the major, "they paid me 50,000 francsdown."

　　"Monsieur Cavalcanti," said Andrea, "do you believe in fairytales?"

　　"I used not to do so, but I really feel now almost obligedto have faith in them."

　　"You have, then, been induced to alter your opinion; youhave had some proofs of their truth?" The major drew fromhis pocket a handful of gold. "Most palpable proofs," saidhe, "as you may perceive."

　　"You think, then, that I may rely on the count's promises?"

　　"Certainly I do."

　　"You are sure he will keep his word with me?"

　　"To the letter, but at the same time, remember, we mustcontinue to play our respective parts. I, as a tenderfather" --

　　"And I as a dutiful son, as they choose that I shall bedescended from you."

　　"Whom do you mean by they?"

　　"Ma foi, I can hardly tell, but I was alluding to those whowrote the letter; you received one, did you not?"

　　"Yes."

　　"From whom?"

　　"From a certain Abbe Busoni."

　　"Have you any knowledge of him?"

　　"No, I have never seen him."

　　"What did he say in the letter?"

　　"You will promise not to betray me?"

　　"Rest assured of that; you well know that our interests arethe same."

　　"Then read for yourself;" and the major gave a letter intothe young man's hand. Andrea read in a low voice --

　　"You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you. Would youlike to become rich, or at least independent? Set outimmediately for Paris, and demand of the Count of MonteCristo, Avenue des Champs Elysees, No. 30, the son whom youhad by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken from you atfive years of age. This son is named Andrea Cavalcanti. Inorder that you may not doubt the kind intention of thewriter of this letter, you will find enclosed an order for2,400 francs, payable in Florence, at Signor Gozzi's; also aletter of introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, on whomI give you a draft of 48,000 francs. Remember to go to thecount on the 26th May at seven o'clock in the evening.

　　(Signed)

　　"Abbe Busoni."

　　"It is the same."

　　"What do you mean?" said the major.

　　"I was going to say that I received a letter almost to thesame effect."

　　"You?"

　　"Yes."

　　"From the Abbe Busoni?"

　　"No."

　　"From whom, then?"

　　"From an Englishman, called Lord Wilmore, who takes the nameof Sinbad the Sailor."

　　"And of whom you have no more knowledge than I of the AbbeBusoni?"

　　"You are mistaken; there I am ahead of you."

　　"You have seen him, then?"

　　"Yes, once."

　　"Where?"

　　"Ah, that is just what I cannot tell you; if I did, I shouldmake you as wise as myself, which it is not my intention todo."

　　"And what did the letter contain?"

　　"Read it."

　　"`You are poor, and your future prospects are dark andgloomy. Do you wish for a name? should you like to be rich,and your own master?'"

　　"Ma foi," said the young man; "was it possible there couldbe two answers to such a question?"

　　"Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at thePorte de Genes, as you enter Nice; pass through Turin,Chambery, and Pont-de-Beauvoisin. Go to the Count of MonteCristo, Avenue des Champs Elysees, on the 26th of May, atseven o'clock in the evening, and demand of him your father.You are the son of the Marchese Cavalcanti and the MarchesaOliva Corsinari. The marquis will give you some papers whichwill certify this fact, and authorize you to appear underthat name in the Parisian world. As to your rank, an annualincome of 50,000 livres will enable you to support itadmirably. I enclose a draft for 5,000 livres, payable on M.Ferrea, banker at Nice, and also a letter of introduction tothe Count of Monte Cristo, whom I have directed to supplyall your wants.

　　"Sinbad the Sailor."

　　"Humph," said the major; "very good. You have seen thecount, you say?"

　　"I have only just left him "

　　"And has he conformed to all that the letter specified?"

　　"He has."

　　"Do you understand it?"

　　"Not in the least."

　　"There is a dupe somewhere."

　　"At all events, it is neither you nor I."

　　"Certainly not."

　　"Well, then" --

　　"Why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?"

　　"No; I agree with you there. We must play the game to theend, and consent to be blindfold."

　　"Ah, you shall see; I promise you I will sustain my part toadmiration."

　　"I never once doubted your doing so." Monte Cristo chosethis moment for re-entering the drawing-room. On hearing thesound of his footsteps, the two men threw themselves in eachother's arms, and while they were in the midst of thisembrace, the count entered. "Well, marquis," said MonteCristo, "you appear to be in no way disappointed in the sonwhom your good fortune has restored to you."

　　"Ah, your excellency, I am overwhelmed with delight."

　　"And what are your feelings?" said Monte Cristo, turning tothe young man.

　　"As for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness."

　　"Happy father, happy son!" said the count.

　　"There is only one thing which grieves me," observed themajor, "and that is the necessity for my leaving Paris sosoon."

　　"Ah, my dear M. Cavalcanti, I trust you will not leavebefore I have had the honor of presenting you to some of myfriends."

　　"I am at your service, sir," replied the major.

　　"Now, sir," said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, "make yourconfession."

　　"To whom?"

　　"Tell M. Cavalcanti something of the state of yourfinances."

　　"Ma foi, monsieur, you have touched upon a tender chord."

　　"Do you hear what he says, major?"

　　"Certainly I do."

　　"But do you understand?"

　　"I do."

　　"Your son says he requires money."

　　"Well, what would you have me do?" said the major.

　　"You should furnish him with some of course," replied MonteCristo.

　　"I?"

　　"Yes, you," said the count, at the same time advancingtowards Andrea, and slipping a packet of bank-notes into theyoung man's hand.

　　"What is this?"

　　"It is from your father."

　　"From my father?"

　　"Yes; did you not tell him just now that you wanted money?Well, then, he deputes me to give you this."

　　"Am I to consider this as part of my income on account?"

　　"No, it is for the first expenses of your settling inParis."

　　"Ah, how good my dear father is!"

　　"Silence," said Monte Cristo; "he does not wish you to knowthat it comes from him."

　　"I fully appreciate his delicacy," said Andrea, cramming thenotes hastily into his pocket.

　　"And now, gentlemen, I wish you good-morning," said MonteCristo.

　　"And when shall we have the honor of seeing you again, yourexcellency?" asked Cavalcanti.

　　"Ah," said Andrea, "when may we hope for that pleasure?"

　　"On Saturday, if you will -- Yes. -- Let me see -- Saturday-- I am to dine at my country house, at Auteuil, on thatday, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28. Several persons areinvited, and among others, M. Danglars, your banker. I willintroduce you to him, for it will be necessary he shouldknow you, as he is to pay your money."

　　"Full dress?" said the major, half aloud.

　　"Oh, yes, certainly," said the count; "uniform, cross,knee-breeches."

　　"And how shall I be dressed?" demanded Andrea.

　　"Oh, very simply; black trousers, patent leather boots,white waistcoat, either a black or blue coat, and a longcravat. Go to Blin or Veronique for your clothes. Baptistinwill tell you where, if you do not know their address. Theless pretension there is in your attire, the better will bethe effect, as you are a rich man. If you mean to buy anyhorses, get them of Devedeux, and if you purchase a phaeton,go to Baptiste for it."

　　"At what hour shall we come?" asked the young man.

　　"About half-past six."

　　"We will be with you at that time," said the major. The twoCavalcanti bowed to the count, and left the house. MonteCristo went to the window, and saw them crossing the street,arm in arm. "There go two miscreants;" said he, "it is apity they are not really related!" -- then, after an instantof gloomy reflection, "Come, I will go to see the Morrels,"said he; "I think that disgust is even more sickening thanhatred."

　　Chapter 57In the Lucerne Patch.

　　Our readers must now allow us to transport them again to theenclosure surrounding M. de Villefort's house, and, behindthe gate, half screened from view by the largechestnut-trees, which on all sides spread their luxuriantbranches, we shall find some people of our acquaintance.This time Maximilian was the first to arrive. He wasintently watching for a shadow to appear among the trees,and awaiting with anxiety the sound of a light step on thegravel walk. At length, the long-desired sound was heard,and instead of one figure, as he had expected, he perceivedthat two were approaching him. The delay had been occasionedby a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugenie, which had beenprolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was expected.That she might not appear to fail in her promise toMaximilian, she proposed to Mademoiselle Danglars that theyshould take a walk in the garden, being anxious to show thatthe delay, which was doubtless a cause of vexation to him,was not occasioned by any neglect on her part. The youngman, with the intuitive perception of a lover, quicklyunderstood the circumstances in which she was involuntarilyplaced, and he was comforted. Besides, although she avoidedcoming within speaking distance, Valentine arranged so thatMaximilian could see her pass and repass, and each time shewent by, she managed, unperceived by her companion, to castan expressive look at the young man, which seemed to say,"Have patience! You see it is not my fault." And Maximilianwas patient, and employed himself in mentally contrastingthe two girls, -- one fair, with soft languishing eyes, afigure gracefully bending like a weeping willow; the other abrunette, with a fierce and haughty expression, and asstraight as a poplar. It is unnecessary to state that, inthe eyes of the young man, Valentine did not suffer by thecontrast. In about half an hour the girls went away, andMaximilian understood that Mademoiselle Danglars' visit hadat last come to an end. In a few minutes Valentinere-entered the garden alone. For fear that any one should beobserving her return, she walked slowly; and instead ofimmediately directing her steps towards the gate, she seatedherself on a bench, and, carefully casting her eyes around,to convince herself that she was not watched, she presentlyarose, and proceeded quickly to join Maximilian.

　　"Good-evening, Valentine," said a well-known voice.

　　"Good-evening, Maximilian; I know I have kept you waiting,but you saw the cause of my delay."

　　"Yes, I recognized Mademoiselle Danglars. I was not awarethat you were so intimate with her."

　　"Who told you we were intimate, Maximilian?"

　　"No one, but you appeared to be so. From the manner in whichyou walked and talked together, one would have thought youwere two school-girls telling your secrets to each other."

　　"We were having a confidential conversation," returnedValentine; "she was owning to me her repugnance to themarriage with M. de Morcerf; and I, on the other hand, wasconfessing to her how wretched it made me to think ofmarrying M. d'Epinay."

　　"Dear Valentine!"

　　"That will account to you for the unreserved manner whichyou observed between me and Eugenie, as in speaking of theman whom I could not love, my thoughts involuntarilyreverted to him on whom my affections were fixed."

　　"Ah, how good you are to say so, Valentine! You possess aquality which can never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars. Itis that indefinable charm which is to a woman what perfumeis to the flower and flavor to the fruit, for the beauty ofeither is not the only quality we seek."

　　"It is your love which makes you look upon everything inthat light."

　　"No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case. I wasobserving you both when you were walking in the garden, and,on my honor, without at all wishing to depreciate the beautyof Mademoiselle Danglars, I cannot understand how any mancan really love her."

　　"The fact is, Maximilian, that I was there, and my presencehad the effect of rendering you unjust in your comparison."

　　"No; but tell me -- it is a question of simple curiosity,and which was suggested by certain ideas passing in my mindrelative to Mademoiselle Danglars" --

　　"I dare say it is something disparaging which you are goingto say. It only proves how little indulgence we may expectfrom your sex," interrupted Valentine.

　　"You cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judgesof each other."

　　"If we are so, it is because we generally judge under theinfluence of excitement. But return to your question."

　　"Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M.de Morcerf on account of loving another?"

　　"I told you I was not on terms of strict intimacy withEugenie."

　　"Yes, but girls tell each other secrets without beingparticularly intimate; own, now, that you did question heron the subject. Ah, I see you are smiling."

　　"If you are already aware of the conversation that passed,the wooden partition which interposed between us and you hasproved but a slight security."

　　"Come, what did she say?"

　　"She told me that she loved no one," said Valentine; "thatshe disliked the idea of being married; that she wouldinfinitely prefer leading an independent and unfetteredlife; and that she almost wished her father might lose hisfortune, that she might become an artist, like her friend,Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly."

　　"Ah, you see" --

　　"Well, what does that prove?" asked Valentine.

　　"Nothing," replied Maximilian.

　　"Then why did you smile?"

　　"Why, you know very well that you are reflecting onyourself, Valentine."

　　"Do you want me to go away?"

　　"Ah, no, no. But do not let us lose time; you are thesubject on which I wish to speak."

　　"True, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutesmore to pass together."

　　"Ma foi," said Maximilian, in consternation.

　　"Yes, you are right; I am but a poor friend to you. What alife I cause you to lead, poor Maximilian, you who areformed for happiness! I bitterly reproach myself, I assureyou."

　　"Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I amsatisfied, and feel that even this long and painful suspenseis amply repaid by five minutes of your society, or twowords from your lips? And I have also a deep conviction thatheaven would not have created two hearts, harmonizing asours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, toseparate us at last."

　　"Those are kind and cheering words. You must hope for usboth, Maximilian; that will make me at least partly happy."

　　"But why must you leave me so soon?"

　　"I do not know particulars. I can only tell you that Madamede Villefort sent to request my presence, as she had acommunication to make on which a part of my fortunedepended. Let them take my fortune, I am already too rich;and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will leave me inpeace and quietness. You would love me as much if I werepoor, would you not, Maximilian?"

　　"Oh, I shall always love you. What should I care for eitherriches or poverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I feltcertain that no one could deprive me of her? But do you notfear that this communication may relate to your marriage?"

　　"I do not think that is the case."

　　"However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed. Iassure you that, as long as I live, I shall never love anyone else!"

　　"You think to reassure me when you say that, Maximilian."

　　"Pardon me, you are right. I am a brute. But I was going totell you that I met M. de Morcerf the other day."

　　"Well?"

　　"Monsieur Franz is his friend, you know."

　　"What then?"

　　"Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz,announcing his immediate return." Valentine turned pale, andleaned her hand against the gate. "Ah heavens, if it werethat! But no, the communication would not come throughMadame de Villefort."

　　"Why not?"

　　"Because -- I scarcely know why -- but it has appeared as ifMadame de Villefort secretly objected to the marriage,although she did not choose openly to oppose it."

　　"Is it so? Then I feel as if I could adore Madame deVillefort."

　　"Do not be in such a hurry to do that," said Valentine, witha sad smile.

　　"If she objects to your marrying M. d'Epinay, she would beall the more likely to listen to any other proposition."

　　"No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame deVillefort objects, it is marriage itself."

　　"Marriage? If she dislikes that so much, why did she evermarry herself?"

　　"You do not understand me, Maximilian. About a year ago, Italked of retiring to a convent. Madame de Villefort, inspite of all the remarks which she considered it her duty tomake, secretly approved of the proposition, my fatherconsented to it at her instigation, and it was only onaccount of my poor grandfather that I finally abandoned theproject. You can form no idea of the expression of that oldman's eye when he looks at me, the only person in the worldwhom he loves, and, I had almost said, by whom he is belovedin return. When he learned my resolution, I shall neverforget the reproachful look which he cast on me, and thetears of utter despair which chased each other down hislifeless cheeks. Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at thatmoment, such remorse for my intention, that, throwing myselfat his feet, I exclaimed, -- `Forgive me, pray forgive me,my dear grandfather; they may do what they will with me, Iwill never leave you.' When I had ceased speaking, hethankfully raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering aword. Ah, Maximilian, I may have much to suffer, but I feelas if my grandfather's look at that moment would more thancompensate for all."

　　"Dear Valentine, you are a perfect angel, and I am sure I donot know what I -- sabring right and left among the Bedouins-- can have done to merit your being revealed to me, unless,indeed, heaven took into consideration the fact that thevictims of my sword were infidels. But tell me what interestMadame de Villefort can have in your remaining unmarried?"

　　"Did I not tell you just now that I was rich, Maximilian --too rich? I possess nearly 50,000 livres in right of mymother; my grandfather and my grandmother, the Marquis andMarquise de Saint-Meran, will leave me as much, and M.Noirtier evidently intends making me his heir. My brotherEdward, who inherits nothing from his mother, will,therefore, be poor in comparison with me. Now, if I hadtaken the veil, all this fortune would have descended to myfather, and, in reversion, to his son."

　　"Ah, how strange it seems that such a young and beautifulwoman should be so avaricious."

　　"It is not for herself that she is so, but for her son, andwhat you regard as a vice becomes almost a virtue whenlooked at in the light of maternal love."

　　"But could you not compromise matters, and give up a portionof your fortune to her son?"

　　"How could I make such a proposition, especially to a womanwho always professes to be so entirely disinterested?"

　　"Valentine, I have always regarded our love in the light ofsomething sacred; consequently, I have covered it with theveil of respect, and hid it in the innermost recesses of mysoul. No human being, not even my sister, is aware of itsexistence. Valentine, will you permit me to make a confidantof a friend and reveal to him the love I bear you?"

　　Valentine started. "A friend, Maximilian; and who is thisfriend? I tremble to give my permission."

　　"Listen, Valentine. Have you never experienced for any onethat sudden and irresistible sympathy which made you feel asif the object of it had been your old and familiar friend,though, in reality, it was the first time you had ever met?Nay, further, have you never endeavored to recall the time,place, and circumstances of your former intercourse, andfailing in this attempt, have almost believed that yourspirits must have held converse with each other in somestate of being anterior to the present, and that you areonly now occupied in a reminiscence of the past?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, that is precisely the feeling which I experiencedwhen I first saw that extraordinary man."

　　"Extraordinary, did you say?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You have known him for some time, then?"

　　"Scarcely longer than eight or ten days."

　　"And do you call a man your friend whom you have only knownfor eight or ten days? Ah, Maximilian, I had hoped you set ahigher value on the title of friend."

　　"Your logic is most powerful, Valentine, but say what youwill, I can never renounce the sentiment which hasinstinctively taken possession of my mind. I feel as if itwere ordained that this man should be associated with allthe good which the future may have in store for me, andsometimes it really seems as if his eye was able to see whatwas to come, and his hand endowed with the power ofdirecting events according to his own will."

　　"He must be a prophet, then," said Valentine, smiling.

　　"Indeed," said Maximilian, "I have often been almost temptedto attribute to him the gift of prophecy; at all events, hehas a wonderful power of foretelling any future good."

　　"Ah," said Valentine in a mournful tone, "do let me see thisman, Maximilian; he may tell me whether I shall ever beloved sufficiently to make amends for all I have suffered."

　　"My poor girl, you know him already."

　　"I know him?"

　　"Yes; it was he who saved the life of your step-mother andher son."

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo?"

　　"The same."

　　"Ah," cried Valentine, "he is too much the friend of Madamede Villefort ever to be mine."

　　"The friend of Madame de Villefort! It cannot be; surely,Valentine, you are mistaken?"

　　"No, indeed, I am not; for I assure you, his power over ourhousehold is almost unlimited. Courted by my step-mother,who regards him as the epitome of human wisdom; admired bymy father, who says he has never before heard such sublimeideas so eloquently expressed; idolized by Edward, who,notwithstanding his fear of the count's large black eyes,runs to meet him the moment he arrives, and opens his hand,in which he is sure to find some delightful present, -- M.de Monte Cristo appears to exert a mysterious and almostuncontrollable influence over all the members of ourfamily."

　　"If such be the case, my dear Valentine, you must yourselfhave felt, or at all events will soon feel, the effects ofhis presence. He meets Albert de Morcerf in Italy -- it isto rescue him from the hands of the banditti; he introduceshimself to Madame Danglars -- it is that he may give her aroyal present; your step-mother and her son pass before hisdoor -- it is that his Nubian may save them fromdestruction. This man evidently possesses the power ofinfluencing events, both as regards men and things. I neversaw more simple tastes united to greater magnificence. Hissmile is so sweet when he addresses me, that I forget itever can be bitter to others. Ah, Valentine, tell me, if heever looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so,depend on it, you will be happy."

　　"Me?" said the young girl, "he never even glances at me; onthe contrary, if I accidentally cross his path, he appearsrather to avoid me. Ah, he is not generous, neither does hepossess that supernatural penetration which you attribute tohim, for if he did, he would have perceived that I wasunhappy; and if he had been generous, seeing me sad andsolitary, he would have used his influence to my advantage,and since, as you say, he resembles the sun, he would havewarmed my heart with one of his life-giving rays. You say heloves you, Maximilian; how do you know that he does? Allwould pay deference to an officer like you, with a fiercemustache and a long sabre, but they think they may crush apoor weeping girl with impunity."

　　"Ah, Valentine, I assure you you are mistaken."

　　"If it were otherwise -- if he treated me diplomatically --that is to say, like a man who wishes, by some means orother, to obtain a footing in the house, so that he mayultimately gain the power of dictating to its occupants --he would, if it had been but once, have honored me with thesmile which you extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I wasunhappy, he understood that I could be of no use to him, andtherefore paid no attention to me whatever. Who knows butthat, in order to please Madame de Villefort and my father,he may not persecute me by every means in his power? It isnot just that he should despise me so, without any reason.Ah, forgive me," said Valentine, perceiving the effect whichher words were producing on Maximilian: "I have done wrong,for I have given utterance to thoughts concerning that manwhich I did not even know existed in my heart. I do not denythe influence of which you speak, or that I have not myselfexperienced it, but with me it has been productive of evilrather than good."

　　"Well, Valentine," said Morrel with a sigh, "we will notdiscuss the matter further. I will not make a confidant ofhim."

　　"Alas," said Valentine, "I see that I have given you pain. Ican only say how sincerely I ask pardon for having griefedyou. But, indeed, I am not prejudiced beyond the power ofconviction. Tell me what this Count of Monte Cristo has donefor you."

　　"I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for Icannot say that the count has rendered me any ostensibleservice. Still, as I have already told you I have aninstinctive affection for him, the source of which I cannotexplain to you. Has the sun done anything for me? No; hewarms me with his rays, and it is by his light that I seeyou -- nothing more. Has such and such a perfume doneanything for me? No; its odor charms one of my senses --that is all I can say when I am asked why I praise it. Myfriendship for him is as strange and unaccountable as hisfor me. A secret voice seems to whisper to me that theremust be something more than chance in this unexpectedreciprocity of friendship. In his most simple actions, aswell as in his most secret thoughts, I find a relation to myown. You will perhaps smile at me when I tell you that, eversince I have known this man, I have involuntarilyentertained the idea that all the good fortune which hisbefallen me originated from him. However, I have managed tolive thirty years without this protection, you will say; butI will endeavor a little to illustrate my meaning. Heinvited me to dine with him on Saturday, which was a verynatural thing for him to do. Well, what have I learnedsince? That your mother and M. de Villefort are both comingto this dinner. I shall meet them there, and who knows whatfuture advantages may result from the interview? This mayappear to you to be no unusual combination of circumstances;nevertheless, I perceive some hidden plot in the arrangement-- something, in fact, more than is apparent on a casualview of the subject. I believe that this singular man, whoappears to fathom the motives of every one, has purposelyarranged for me to meet M. and Madame de Villefort, andsometimes, I confess, I have gone so far as to try to readin his eyes whether he was in possession of the secret ofour love."

　　"My good friend," said Valentine, "I should take you for avisionary, and should tremble for your reason, if I werealways to hear you talk in a strain similar to this. Is itpossible that you can see anything more than the merestchance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My father,who never goes out, has several times been on the point ofrefusing this invitation; Madame de Villefort, on thecontrary, is burning with the desire of seeing thisextraordinary nabob in his own house, therefore, she haswith great difficulty prevailed on my father to accompanyher. No, no; it is as I have said, Maximilian, -- there isno one in the world of whom I can ask help but yourself andmy grandfather, who is little better than a corpse."

　　"I see that you are right, logically speaking," saidMaximilian; "but the gentle voice which usually has suchpower over me fails to convince me to-day."

　　"I feel the same as regards yourself." said Valentine; "andI own that, if you have no stronger proof to give me" --

　　"I have another," replied Maximilian; "but I fear you willdeem it even more absurd than the first."

　　"So much the worse," said Valentine, smiling.

　　"It is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind. My ten years ofservice have also confirmed my ideas on the subject ofsudden inspirations, for I have several times owed my lifeto a mysterious impulse which directed me to move at onceeither to the right or to the left, in order to escape theball which killed the comrade fighting by my side, while itleft me unharmed."

　　"Dear Maximilian, why not attribute your escape to myconstant prayers for your safety? When you are away, I nolonger pray for myself, but for you."

　　"Yes, since you have known me," said Morrel, smiling; "butthat cannot apply to the time previous to our acquaintance,Valentine."

　　"You are very provoking, and will not give me credit foranything; but let me hear this second proof, which youyourself own to be absurd."

　　"Well, look through this opening, and you will see thebeautiful new horse which I rode here."

　　"Ah, what a beautiful creature!" cried Valentine; "why didyou not bring him close to the gate, so that I could talk tohim and pat him?"

　　"He is, as you see, a very valuable animal," saidMaximilian. "You know that my means are limited, and that Iam what would be designated a man of moderate pretensions.Well, I went to a horse dealer's, where I saw thismagnificent horse, which I have named Medeah. I asked theprice; they told me it was 4,500 francs. I was, therefore,obliged to give it up, as you may imagine, but I own I wentaway with rather a heavy heart, for the horse had looked atme affectionately, had rubbed his head against me and, whenI mounted him, had pranced in the most delightful wayimaginable, so that I was altogether fascinated with him.The same evening some friends of mine visited me, -- M. deChateau-Renaud, M. Debray, and five or six other choicespirits, whom you do not know, even by name. They proposed agame of bouillotte. I never play, for I am not rich enoughto afford to lose, or sufficiently poor to desire to gain.But I was at my own house, you understand, so there wasnothing to be done but to send for the cards, which I did.

　　"Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristoarrived. He took his seat amongst them; they played, and Iwon. I am almost ashamed to say that my gains amounted to5,000 francs. We separated at midnight. I could not defer mypleasure, so I took a cabriolet and drove to the horsedealer's. Feverish and excited, I rang at the door. Theperson who opened it must have taken me for a madman, for Irushed at once to the stable. Medeah was standing at therack, eating his hay. I immediately put on the saddle andbridle, to which operation he lent himself with the bestgrace possible; then, putting the 4,500 francs into thehands of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil myintention of passing the night in riding in the ChampsElysees. As I rode by the count's house I perceived a lightin one of the windows, and fancied I saw the shadow of hisfigure moving behind the curtain. Now, Valentine, I firmlybelieve that he knew of my wish to possess this horse, andthat he lost expressly to give me the means of procuringhim."

　　"My dear Maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you willnot love even me long. A man who accustoms himself to livein such a world of poetry and imagination must find far toolittle excitement in a common, every-day sort of attachmentsuch as ours. But they are calling me. Do you hear?"

　　"Ah, Valentine," said Maximilian, "give me but one fingerthrough this opening in the grating, one finger, thelittlest finger of all, that I may have the happiness ofkissing it."

　　"Maximilian, we said we would be to each other as twovoices, two shadows."

　　"As you will, Valentine."

　　"Shall you be happy if I do what you wish?"

　　"Oh, yes!" Valentine mounted on a bench, and passed not onlyher finger but her whole hand through the opening.Maximilian uttered a cry of delight, and, springingforwards, seized the hand extended towards him, andimprinted on it a fervent and impassioned kiss. The littlehand was then immediately withdrawn, and the young man sawValentine hurrying towards the house, as though she werealmost terrified at her own sensations.

　　Chapter 58M. Noirtier de Villefort.

　　We will now relate what was passing in the house of theking's attorney after the departure of Madame Danglars andher daughter, and during the time of the conversationbetween Maximilian and Valentine, which we have justdetailed. M. de Villefort entered his father's room,followed by Madame de Villefort. Both of the visitors, aftersaluting the old man and speaking to Barrois, a faithfulservant, who had been twenty-five years in his service, tooktheir places on either side of the paralytic.

　　M. Noirtier was sitting in an arm-chair, which moved uponcasters, in which he was wheeled into the room in themorning, and in the same way drawn out again at night. Hewas placed before a large glass, which reflected the wholeapartment, and so, without any attempt to move, which wouldhave been impossible, he could see all who entered the roomand everything which was going on around him. M. Noirtier,although almost as immovable as a corpse, looked at thenewcomers with a quick and intelligent expression,perceiving at once, by their ceremonious courtesy, that theywere come on business of an unexpected and officialcharacter. Sight and hearing were the only senses remaining,and they, like two solitary sparks, remained to animate themiserable body which seemed fit for nothing but the grave;it was only, however, by means of one of these senses thathe could reveal the thoughts and feelings that stilloccupied his mind, and the look by which he gave expressionto his inner life was like the distant gleam of a candlewhich a traveller sees by night across some desert place,and knows that a living being dwells beyond the silence andobscurity. Noirtier's hair was long and white, and flowedover his shoulders; while in his eyes, shaded by thick blacklashes, was concentrated, as it often happens with an organwhich is used to the exclusion of the others, all theactivity, address, force, and intelligence which wereformerly diffused over his whole body; and so although themovement of the arm, the sound of the voice, and the agilityof the body, were wanting, the speaking eye sufficed forall. He commanded with it; it was the medium through whichhis thanks were conveyed. In short, his whole appearanceproduced on the mind the impression of a corpse with livingeyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observethe expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up theseorgans, while the rest of the rigid and marble-like featureswere utterly deprived of the power of participation. Threepersons only could understand this language of the poorparalytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and the oldservant of whom we have already spoken. But as Villefort sawhis father but seldom, and then only when absolutelyobliged, and as he never took any pains to please or gratifyhim when he was there, all the old man's happiness wascentred in his granddaughter. Valentine, by means of herlove, her patience, and her devotion, had learned to read inNoirtier's look all the varied feelings which were passingin his mind. To this dumb language, which was sounintelligible to others, she answered by throwing her wholesoul into the expression of her countenance, and in thismanner were the conversations sustained between the bloominggirl and the helpless invalid, whose body could scarcely becalled a living one, but who, nevertheless, possessed a fundof knowledge and penetration, united with a will as powerfulas ever although clogged by a body rendered utterlyincapable of obeying its impulses. Valentine had solved theproblem, and was able easily to understand his thoughts, andto convey her own in return, and, through her untiring anddevoted assiduity, it was seldom that, in the ordinarytransactions of every-day life, she failed to anticipate thewishes of the living, thinking mind, or the wants of thealmost inanimate body. As to the servant, he had, as we havesaid, been with his master for five and twenty years,therefore he knew all his habits, and it was seldom thatNoirtier found it necessary to ask for anything, so promptwas he in administering to all the necessities of theinvalid. Villefort did not need the help of either Valentineor the domestic in order to carry on with his father thestrange conversation which he was about to begin. As we havesaid, he perfectly understood the old man's vocabulary, andif he did not use it more often, it was only indifferenceand ennui which prevented him from so doing. He thereforeallowed Valentine to go into the garden, sent away Barrois,and after having seated himself at his father's right hand,while Madame de Villefort placed herself on the left, headdressed him thus: --

　　"I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine hasnot come with us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for ourconference will be one which could not with propriety becarried on in the presence of either. Madame de Villefortand I have a communication to make to you."

　　Noirtier's face remained perfectly passive during this longpreamble, while, on the contrary, Villefort's eye wasendeavoring to penetrate into the inmost recesses of the oldman's heart.

　　"This communication," continued the procureur, in that coldand decisive tone which seemed at once to preclude alldiscussion, "will, we are sure, meet with your approbation."The eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy ofexpression which prevented his son from obtaining anyknowledge of the feelings which were passing in his mind; helistened, nothing more. "Sir," resumed Villefort, "we arethinking of marrying Valentine." Had the old man's face beenmoulded in wax it could not have shown less emotion at thisnews than was now to be traced there. "The marriage willtake place in less than three months," said Villefort.Noirtier's eye still retained its inanimate expression.

　　Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversationand added, -- "We thought this news would possess aninterest for you, sir, who have always entertained a greataffection for Valentine; it therefore only now remains forus to tell you the name of the young man for whom she isdestined. It is one of the most desirable connections whichcould possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rankin society, and every personal qualification likely torender Valentine supremely happy, -- his name, moreover,cannot be wholly unknown to you. It is M. Franz de Quesnel,Baron d'Epinay."

　　While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watchedthe old man's countenance. When Madame de Villefortpronounced the name of Franz, the pupil of M. Noirtier's eyebegan to dilate, and his eyelids trembled with the samemovement that may be perceived on the lips of an individualabout to speak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madamede Villefort and his son. The procureur, who knew thepolitical hatred which had formerly existed between M.Noirtier and the elder d'Epinay, well understood theagitation and anger which the announcement had produced;but, feigning not to perceive either, he immediately resumedthe narrative begun by his wife. "Sir," said he, "you areaware that Valentine is about to enter her nineteenth year,which renders it important that she should lose no time informing a suitable alliance. Nevertheless, you have not beenforgotten in our plans, and we have fully ascertainedbeforehand that Valentine's future husband will consent, notto live in this house, for that might not be pleasant forthe young people, but that you should live with them; sothat you and Valentine, who are so attached to each other,would not be separated, and you would be able to pursueexactly the same course of life which you have hithertodone, and thus, instead of losing, you will be a gainer bythe change, as it will secure to you two children instead ofone, to watch over and comfort you."

　　Noirtier's look was furious; it was very evident thatsomething desperate was passing in the old man's mind, for acry of anger and grief rose in his throat, and not beingable to find vent in utterance, appeared almost to chokehim, for his face and lips turned quite purple with thestruggle. Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, "It isvery warm, and the heat affects M. Noirtier." He thenreturned to his place, but did not sit down. "Thismarriage," added Madame de Villefort, "is quite agreeable tothe wishes of M. d'Epinay and his family; besides, he had norelations nearer than an uncle and aunt, his mother havingdied at his birth, and his father having been assassinatedin 1815, that is to say, when he was but two years old; itnaturally followed that the child was permitted to choosehis own pursuits, and he has, therefore, seldom acknowledgedany other authority but that of his own will."

　　"That assassination was a mysterious affair," saidVillefort, "and the perpetrators have hitherto escapeddetection, although suspicion has fallen on the head of morethan one person." Noirtier made such an effort that his lipsexpanded into a smile.

　　"Now," continued Villefort, "those to whom the guilt reallybelongs, by whom the crime was committed, on whose heads thejustice of man may probably descend here, and the certainjudgment of God hereafter, would rejoice in the opportunitythus afforded of bestowing such a peace-offering asValentine on the son of him whose life they so ruthlesslydestroyed." Noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotionmore than could have been deemed possible with such anenfeebled and shattered frame. "Yes, I understand," was thereply contained in his look; and this look expressed afeeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound contempt.Villefort fully understood his father's meaning, andanswered by a slight shrug of his shoulders. He thenmotioned to his wife to take leave. "Now sir," said Madamede Villefort, "I must bid you farewell. Would you like me tosend Edward to you for a short time?"

　　It had been agreed that the old man should express hisapprobation by closing his eyes, his refusal by winking themseveral times, and if he had some desire or feeling toexpress, he raised them to heaven. If he wanted Valentine,he closed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the left. AtMadame de Villefort's proposition he instantly winked hiseyes. Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip andsaid, "Then shall I send Valentine to you?" The old manclosed his eyes eagerly, thereby intimating that such washis wish. M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and left theroom, giving orders that Valentine should be summoned to hergrandfather's presence, and feeling sure that she would havemuch to do to restore calmness to the perturbed spirit ofthe invalid. Valentine, with a color still heightened byemotion, entered the room just after her parents had quittedit. One look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfatherwas suffering, and that there was much on his mind which hewas wishing to communicate to her. "Dear grandpapa," criedshe, "what has happened? They have vexed you, and you areangry?" The paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent."Who has displeased you? Is it my father?"

　　"No."

　　"Madame de Villefort?"

　　"No."

　　"Me?" The former sign was repeated. "Are you displeased withme?" cried Valentine in astonishment. M. Noirtier againclosed his eyes. "And what have I done, dear grandpapa, thatyou should be angry with me?" cried Valentine.

　　There was no answer, and she continued. "I have not seen youall day. Has any one been speaking to you against me?"

　　"Yes," said the old man's look, with eagerness.

　　"Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa -- Ah --M. and Madame de Villefort have just left this room, havethey not?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And it was they who told you something which made youangry? What was it then? May I go and ask them, that I mayhave the opportunity of making my peace with you?"

　　"No, no," said Noirtier's look.

　　"Ah, you frighten me. What can they have said?" and sheagain tried to think what it could be.

　　"Ah, I know," said she, lowering her voice and going closeto the old man. "They have been speaking of my marriage, --have they not?"

　　"Yes," replied the angry look.

　　"I understand; you are displeased at the silence I havepreserved on the subject. The reason of it was, that theyhad insisted on my keeping the matter a secret, and beggedme not to tell you anything of it. They did not evenacquaint me with their intentions, and I only discoveredthem by chance, that is why I have been so reserved withyou, dear grandpapa. Pray forgive me." But there was no lookcalculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say was, "It isnot only your reserve which afflicts me."

　　"What is it, then?" asked the young girl. "Perhaps you thinkI shall abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forgetyou when I am married?"

　　"No."

　　"They told you, then, that M. d'Epinay consented to our allliving together?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then why are you still vexed and grieved?" The old man'seyes beamed with an expression of gentle affection. "Yes, Iunderstand," said Valentine; "it is because you love me."The old man assented. "And you are afraid I shall beunhappy?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You do not like M. Franz?" The eyes repeated several times,"No, no, no."

　　"Then you are vexed with the engagement?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, listen," said Valentine, throwing herself on herknees, and putting her arm round her grandfather's neck, "Iam vexed, too, for I do not love M. Franz d'Epinay." Anexpression of intense joy illumined the old man's eyes."When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember howangry you were with me?" A tear trembled in the eye of theinvalid. "Well," continued Valentine, "the reason of myproposing it was that I might escape this hateful marriage,which drives me to despair." Noirtier's breathing came thickand short. "Then the idea of this marriage really grievesyou too? Ah, if you could but help me -- if we could bothtogether defeat their plan! But you are unable to opposethem, -- you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will is sofirm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest asI am myself. Alas, you, who would have been such a powerfulprotector to me in the days of your health and strength, cannow only sympathize in my joys and sorrows, without beingable to take any active part in them. However, this is much,and calls for gratitude and heaven has not taken away all myblessings when it leaves me your sympathy and kindness."

　　At these words there appeared in Noirtier's eye anexpression of such deep meaning that the young girl thoughtshe could read these words there: "You are mistaken; I canstill do much for you."

　　"Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?" saidValentine.

　　"Yes." Noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed onbetween him and Valentine when he wanted anything.

　　"What is it you want, dear grandpapa?" said Valentine, andshe endeavored to recall to mind all the things which hewould be likely to need; and as the ideas presentedthemselves to her mind, she repeated them aloud, then, --finding that all her efforts elicited nothing but a constant"No," -- she said, "Come, since this plan does not answer, Iwill have recourse to another." She then recited all theletters of the alphabet from A down to N. When she arrivedat that letter the paralytic made her understand that shehad spoken the initial letter of the thing he wanted. "Ah,"said Valentine, "the thing you desire begins with the letterN; it is with N that we have to do, then. Well, let me see,what can you want that begins with N? Na -- Ne -- Ni -- No"--

　　"Yes, yes, yes," said the old man's eye.

　　"Ah, it is No, then?"

　　"Yes." Valentine fetched a dictionary, which she placed on adesk before Noirtier; she opened it, and, seeing that theodd man's eye was thoroughly fixed on its pages, she ran herfinger quickly up and down the columns. During the six yearswhich had passed since Noirtier first fell into this sadstate, Valentine's powers of invention had been too oftenput to the test not to render her expert in devisingexpedients for gaining a knowledge of his wishes, and theconstant practice had so perfected her in the art that sheguessed the old man's meaning as quickly as if he himselfhad been able to seek for what he wanted. At the word"Notary," Noirtier made a sign to her to stop. "Notary,"said she, "do you want a notary, dear grandpapa?" The oldman again signified that it was a notary he desired.

　　"You would wish a notary to be sent for then?" saidValentine.

　　"Yes."

　　"Shall my father be informed of your wish?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Do you wish the notary to be sent for immediately?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then they shall go for him directly, dear grandpapa. Isthat all you want?"

　　"Yes." Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant totell Monsieur or Madame de Villefort that they wererequested to come to M. Noirtier's room. "Are you satisfiednow?" inquired Valentine.

　　"Yes."

　　"I am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discoverthat," -- and the young girl smiled on her grandfather, asif he had been a child. M. de Villefort entered, followed byBarrois. "What do you want me for, sir?" demanded he of theparalytic.

　　"Sir," said Valentine, "my grandfather wishes for a notary."At this strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort andhis father exchanged looks. "Yes," motioned the latter, witha firmness which seemed to declare that with the help ofValentine and his old servant, who both knew what his wisheswere, he was quite prepared to maintain the contest. "Do youwish for a notary?" asked Villefort.

　　"Yes."

　　"What to do?"

　　Noirtier made no answer. "What do you want with a notary?"again repeated Villefort. The invalid's eye remained fixed,by which expression he intended to intimate that hisresolution was unalterable. "Is it to do us some ill turn?Do you think it is worth while?" said Villefort.

　　"Still," said Barrois, with the freedom and fidelity of anold servant, "if M. Noirtier asks for a notary, I suppose hereally wishes for a notary; therefore I shall go at once andfetch one." Barrois acknowledged no master but Noirtier, andnever allowed his desires in any way to be contradicted.

　　"Yes, I do want a notary," motioned the old man, shuttinghis eyes with a look of defiance, which seemed to say, "andI should like to see the person who dares to refuse myrequest."

　　"You shall have a notary, as you absolutely wish for one,sir," said Villefort; "but I shall explain to him your stateof health, and make excuses for you, for the scene cannotfail of being a most ridiculous one."

　　"Never mind that," said Barrois; "I shall go and fetch anotary, nevertheless," -- and the old servant departedtriumphantly on his mission.

　　Chapter 59The Will.

　　As soon as Barrois had left the room, Noirtier looked atValentine with a malicious expression that said many things.The young girl perfectly understood the look, and so didVillefort, for his countenance became clouded, and heknitted his eyebrows angrily. He took a seat, and quietlyawaited the arrival of the notary. Noirtier saw him seathimself with an appearance of perfect indifference, at thesame time giving a side look at Valentine, which made herunderstand that she also was to remain in the room.Three-quarters of an hour after, Barrois returned, bringingthe notary with him. "Sir," said Villefort, after the firstsalutations were over, "you were sent for by M. Noirtier,whom you see here. All his limbs have become completelyparalysed, he has lost his voice also, and we ourselves findmuch trouble in endeavoring to catch some fragments of hismeaning." Noirtier cast an appealing look on Valentine,which look was at once so earnest and imperative, that sheanswered immediately. "Sir," said she, "I perfectlyunderstand my grandfather's meaning at all times."

　　"That is quite true," said Barrois; "and that is what I toldthe gentleman as we walked along."

　　"Permit me," said the notary, turning first to Villefort andthen to Valentine -- "permit me to state that the case inquestion is just one of those in which a public officer likemyself cannot proceed to act without thereby incurring adangerous responsibility. The first thing necessary torender an act valid is, that the notary should be thoroughlyconvinced that he has faithfully interpreted the will andwishes of the person dictating the act. Now I cannot be sureof the approbation or disapprobation of a client who cannotspeak, and as the object of his desire or his repugnancecannot be clearly proved to me, on account of his want ofspeech, my services here would be quite useless, and cannotbe legally exercised." The notary then prepared to retire.An imperceptible smile of triumph was expressed on the lipsof the procureur. Noirtier looked at Valentine with anexpression so full of grief, that she arrested the departureof the notary. "Sir," said she, "the language which I speakwith my grandfather may be easily learnt, and I can teachyou in a few minutes, to understand it almost as well as Ican myself. Will you tell me what you require, in order toset your conscience quite at ease on the subject?"

　　"In order to render an act valid, I must be certain of theapprobation or disapprobation of my client. Illness of bodywould not affect the validity of the deed, but sanity ofmind is absolutely requisite."

　　"Well, sir, by the help of two signs, with which I willacquaint you presently, you may ascertain with perfectcertainty that my grandfather is still in the fullpossession of all his mental faculties. M. Noirtier, beingdeprived of voice and motion, is accustomed to convey hismeaning by closing his eyes when he wishes to signify `yes,'and to wink when he means `no.' You now know quite enough toenable you to converse with M. Noirtier; -- try." Noirtiergave Valentine such a look of tenderness and gratitude thatit was comprehended even by the notary himself. "You haveheard and understood what your granddaughter has beensaying, sir, have you?" asked the notary. Noirtier closedhis eyes. "And you approve of what she said -- that is tosay, you declare that the signs which she mentioned arereally those by means of which you are accustomed to conveyyour thoughts?"

　　"Yes."

　　"It was you who sent for me?"

　　"Yes."

　　"To make your will?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And you do not wish me to go away without fulfilling youroriginal intentions?" The old man winked violently. "Well,sir," said the young girl, "do you understand now, and isyour conscience perfectly at rest on the subject?" Butbefore the notary could answer, Villefort had drawn himaside. "Sir," said he, "do you suppose for a moment that aman can sustain a physical shock, such as M. Noirtier hasreceived, without any detriment to his mental faculties?"

　　"It is not exactly that, sir," said the notary, "which makesme uneasy, but the difficulty will be in wording histhoughts and intentions, so as to be able to get hisanswers."

　　"You must see that to be an utter impossibility," saidVillefort. Valentine and the old man heard thisconversation, and Noirtier fixed his eye so earnestly onValentine that she felt bound to answer to the look.

　　"Sir," said she, "that need not make you uneasy, howeverdifficult it may at first sight appear to be. I can discoverand explain to you my grandfather's thoughts, so as to putan end to all your doubts and fears on the subject. I havenow been six years with M. Noirtier, and let him tell you ifever once, during that time, he has entertained a thoughtwhich he was unable to make me understand."

　　"No," signed the old man.

　　"Let us try what we can do, then," said the notary. "Youaccept this young lady as your interpreter, M. Noirtier?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, sir, what do you require of me, and what document isit that you wish to be drawn up?" Valentine named all theletters of the alphabet until she came to W. At this letterthe eloquent eye of Noirtier gave her notice that she was tostop. "It is very evident that it is the letter W which M.Noirtier wants," said the notary. "Wait," said Valentine;and, turning to her grandfather, she repeated, "Wa -- We --Wi" -- The old man stopped her at the last syllable.Valentine then took the dictionary, and the notary watchedher while she turned over the pages. She passed her fingerslowly down the columns, and when she came to the word"Will," M. Noirtier's eye bade her stop. "Will," said thenotary; "it is very evident that M. Noirtier is desirous ofmaking his will."

　　"Yes, yes, yes," motioned the invalid.

　　"Really, sir, you must allow that this is mostextraordinary," said the astonished notary, turning to M. deVillefort. "Yes," said the procureur, "and I think the willpromises to be yet more extraordinary, for I cannot see howit is to be drawn up without the intervention of Valentine,and she may, perhaps, be considered as too much interestedin its contents to allow of her being a suitable interpreterof the obscure and ill-defined wishes of her grandfather."

　　"No, no, no," replied the eye of the paralytic.

　　"What?" said Villefort, "do you mean to say that Valentineis not interested in your will?"

　　"No."

　　"Sir," said the notary, whose interest had been greatlyexcited, and who had resolved on publishing far and wide theaccount of this extraordinary and picturesque scene, "whatappeared so impossible to me an hour ago, has now becomequite easy and practicable, and this may be a perfectlyvalid will, provided it be read in the presence of sevenwitnesses, approved by the testator, and sealed by thenotary in the presence of the witnesses. As to the time, itwill not require very much more than the generality ofwills. There are certain forms necessary to be gone through,and which are always the same. As to the details, thegreater part will be furnished afterwards by the state inwhich we find the affairs of the testator, and by yourself,who, having had the management of them, can doubtless givefull information on the subject. But besides all this, inorder that the instrument may not be contested, I am anxiousto give it the greatest possible authenticity, therefore,one of my colleagues will help me, and, contrary to custom,will assist in the dictation of the testament. Are yousatisfied, sir?" continued the notary, addressing the oldman.

　　"Yes," looked the invalid, his eye beaming with delight atthe ready interpretation of his meaning.

　　"What is he going to do?" thought Villefort, whose positiondemanded much reserve, but who was longing to know what hisfather's intentions were. He left the room to give ordersfor another notary to be sent, but Barrois, who had heardall that passed, had guessed his master's wishes, and hadalready gone to fetch one. The procureur then told his wifeto come up. In the course of a quarter of an hour every onehad assembled in the chamber of the paralytic; the secondnotary had also arrived. A few words sufficed for a mutualunderstanding between the two officers of the law. They readto Noirtier the formal copy of a will, in order to give himan idea of the terms in which such documents are generallycouched; then, in order to test the capacity of thetestator, the first notary said, turning towards him, --"When an individual makes his will, it is generally in favoror in prejudice of some person."

　　"Yes."

　　"Have you an exact idea of the amount of your fortune?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I will name to you several sums which will increase bygradation; you will stop me when I reach the onerepresenting the amount of your own possessions?"

　　"Yes." There was a kind of solemnity in this interrogation.Never had the struggle between mind and matter been moreapparent than now, and if it was not a sublime, it was, atleast, a curious spectacle. They had formed a circle roundthe invalid; the second notary was sitting at a table,prepared for writing, and his colleague was standing beforethe testator in the act of interrogating him on the subjectto which we have alluded. "Your fortune exceeds 300,000francs, does it not?" asked he. Noirtier made a sign that itdid. "Do you possess 400,000 francs?" inquired the notary.Noirtier's eye remained immovable. "Five hundred thousand?"The same expression continued. "Six hundred thousand --700,000 -- 800,000 -- 900,000?" Noirtier stopped him at thelast-named sum. "You are then in possession of 900,000francs?" asked the notary. "Yes."

　　"In landed property?"

　　"No."

　　"In stock?"

　　"Yes."

　　"The stock is in your own hands?" The look which M. Noirtiercast on Barrois showed that there was something wantingwhich he knew where to find. The old servant left the room,and presently returned, bringing with him a small casket."Do you permit us to open this casket?" asked the notary.Noirtier gave his assent. They opened it, and found 900,000francs in bank scrip. The first notary handed over eachnote, as he examined it, to his colleague.

　　The total amount was found to be as M. Noirtier had stated."It is all as he has said; it is very evident that the mindstill retains its full force and vigor." Then, turningtowards the paralytic, he said, "You possess, then, 900,000francs of capital, which, according to the manner in whichyou have invested it, ought to bring in an income of about40,000 livres?"

　　"Yes."

　　"To whom do you desire to leave this fortune?"

　　"Oh," said Madame de Villefort, "there is not much doubt onthat subject. M. Noirtier tenderly loves his granddaughter,Mademoiselle de Villefort; it is she who has nursed andtended him for six years, and has, by her devoted attention,fully secured the affection, I had almost said thegratitude, of her grandfather, and it is but just that sheshould reap the fruit of her devotion." The eye of Noirtierclearly showed by its expression that he was not deceived bythe false assent given by Madame de Villefort's words andmanner to the motives which she supposed him to entertain."Is it, then, to Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort thatyou leave these 900,000 francs?" demanded the notary,thinking he had only to insert this clause, but waitingfirst for the assent of Noirtier, which it was necessaryshould be given before all the witnesses of this singularscene. Valentine, when her name was made the subject ofdiscussion, had stepped back, to escape unpleasantobservation; her eyes were cast down, and she was crying.The old man looked at her for an instant with an expressionof the deepest tenderness, then, turning towards the notary,he significantly winked his eye in token of dissent.

　　"What," said the notary, "do you not intend makingMademoiselle Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?"

　　"No."

　　"You are not making any mistake, are you?" said the notary;"you really mean to declare that such is not yourintention?"

　　"No," repeated Noirtier; "No." Valentine raised her head,struck dumb with astonishment. It was not so much theconviction that she was disinherited that caused her grief,but her total inability to account for the feelings whichhad provoked her grandfather to such an act. But Noirtierlooked at her with so much affectionate tenderness that sheexclaimed, "Oh, grandpapa, I see now that it is only yourfortune of which you deprive me; you still leave me the lovewhich I have always enjoyed."

　　"Ah, yes, most assuredly," said the eyes of the paralytic,for he closed them with an expression which Valentine couldnot mistake. "Thank you, thank you," murmured she. The oldman's declaration that Valentine was not the destinedinheritor of his fortune had excited the hopes of Madame deVillefort; she gradually approached the invalid, and said:"Then, doubtless, dear M. Noirtier, you intend leaving yourfortune to your grandson, Edward de Villefort?" The winkingof the eyes which answered this speech was most decided andterrible, and expressed a feeling almost amounting tohatred.

　　"No?" said the notary; "then, perhaps, it is to your son, M.de Villefort?"

　　"No." The two notaries looked at each other in muteastonishment and inquiry as to what were the real intentionsof the testator. Villefort and his wife both grew red, onefrom shame, the other from anger.

　　"What have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?" saidValentine; "you no longer seem to love any of us?" The oldman's eyes passed rapidly from Villefort and his wife, andrested on Valentine with a look of unutterable fondness."Well," said she; "if you love me, grandpapa, try and bringthat love to bear upon your actions at this present moment.You know me well enough to be quite sure that I have neverthought of your fortune; besides, they say I am already richin right of my mother -- too rich, even. Explain yourself,then." Noirtier fixed his intelligent eyes on Valentine'shand. "My hand?" said she.

　　"Yes."

　　"Her hand!" exclaimed every one.

　　"Oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that myfather's mind is really impaired," said Villefort.

　　"Ah," cried Valentine suddenly, "I understand. It is mymarriage you mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?"

　　"Yes, yes, yes," signed the paralytic, casting on Valentinea look of joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning.

　　"You are angry with us all on account of this marriage, areyou not?"

　　"Yes?"

　　"Really, this is too absurd," said Villefort.

　　"Excuse me, sir," replied the notary; "on the contrary, themeaning of M. Noirtier is quite evident to me, and I canquite easily connect the train of ideas passing in hismind."

　　"You do not wish me to marry M. Franz d'Epinay?" observedValentine.

　　"I do not wish it," said the eye of her grandfather. "Andyou disinherit your granddaughter," continued the notary,"because she has contracted an engagement contrary to yourwishes?"

　　"Yes."

　　"So that, but for this marriage, she would have been yourheir?"

　　"Yes." There was a profound silence. The two notaries wereholding a consultation as to the best means of proceedingwith the affair. Valentine was looking at her grandfatherwith a smile of intense gratitude, and Villefort was bitinghis lips with vexation, while Madame de Villefort could notsucceed in repressing an inward feeling of joy, which, inspite of herself, appeared in her whole countenance. "But,"said Villefort, who was the first to break the silence, "Iconsider that I am the best judge of the propriety of themarriage in question. I am the only person possessing theright to dispose of my daughter's hand. It is my wish thatshe should marry M. Franz d'Epinay -- and she shall marryhim." Valentine sank weeping into a chair.

　　"Sir," said the notary, "how do you intend disposing of yourfortune in case Mademoiselle de Villefort still determineson marrying M. Franz?" The old man gave no answer. "Youwill, of course, dispose of it in some way or other?"

　　"Yes."

　　"In favor of some member of your family?"

　　"No."

　　"Do you intend devoting it to charitable purposes, then?"pursued the notary.

　　"Yes."

　　"But," said the notary, "you are aware that the law does notallow a son to be entirely deprived of his patrimony?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You only intend, then, to dispose of that part of yourfortune which the law allows you to subtract from theinheritance of your son?" Noirtier made no answer. "Do youstill wish to dispose of all?"

　　"Yes."

　　"But they will contest the will after your death?"

　　"No."

　　"My father knows me," replied Villefort; "he is quite surethat his wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, heunderstands that in my position I cannot plead against thepoor." The eye of Noirtier beamed with triumph. "What do youdecide on, sir?" asked the notary of Villefort.

　　"Nothing, sir; it is a resolution which my father has takenand I know he never alters his mind. I am quite resigned.These 900,000 francs will go out of the family in order toenrich some hospital; but it is ridiculous thus to yield tothe caprices of an old man, and I shall, therefore, actaccording to my conscience." Having said this, Villefortquitted the room with his wife, leaving his father atliberty to do as he pleased. The same day the will was made,the witnesses were brought, it was approved by the old man,sealed in the presence of all and given in charge to M.Deschamps, the family notary.

　　Chapter 60The Telegraph.

　　M. and Madame de Villefort found on their return that theCount of Monte Cristo, who had come to visit them in theirabsence, had been ushered into the drawing-room, and wasstill awaiting them there. Madame de Villefort, who had notyet sufficiently recovered from her late emotion to allow ofher entertaining visitors so immediately, retired to herbedroom, while the procureur, who could better depend uponhimself, proceeded at once to the salon. Although M. deVillefort flattered himself that, to all outward view, hehad completely masked the feelings which were passing in hismind, he did not know that the cloud was still lowering onhis brow, so much so that the count, whose smile wasradiant, immediately noticed his sombre and thoughtful air."Ma foi," said Monte Cristo, after the first complimentswere over, "what is the matter with you, M. de Villefort?Have I arrived at the moment when you were drawing up anindictment for a capital crime?" Villefort tried to smile."No, count," he replied, "I am the only victim in this case.It is I who lose my cause, and it is ill-luck, obstinacy,and folly which have caused it to be decided against me."

　　"To what do you refer?" said Monte Cristo with well-feignedinterest. "Have you really met with some great misfortune?"

　　"Oh, no, monsieur," said Villefort with a bitter smile; "itis only a loss of money which I have sustained -- nothingworth mentioning, I assure you."

　　"True," said Monte Cristo, "the loss of a sum of moneybecomes almost immaterial with a fortune such as youpossess, and to one of your philosophic spirit."

　　"It is not so much the loss of the money that vexes me,"said Villefort, "though, after all, 900,000 francs are worthregretting; but I am the more annoyed with this fate,chance, or whatever you please to call the power which hasdestroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may blast theprospects of my child also, as it is all occasioned by anold man relapsed into second childhood."

　　"What do you say?" said the count; "900,000 francs? It isindeed a sum which might be regretted even by a philosopher.And who is the cause of all this annoyance?"

　　"My father, as I told you."

　　"M. Noirtier? But I thought you told me he had becomeentirely paralyzed, and that all his faculties werecompletely destroyed?"

　　"Yes, his bodily faculties, for he can neither move norspeak, nevertheless he thinks, acts, and wills in the mannerI have described. I left him about five minutes ago, and heis now occupied in dictating his will to two notaries."

　　"But to do this he must have spoken?"

　　"He has done better than that -- he has made himselfunderstood."

　　"How was such a thing possible?"

　　"By the help of his eyes, which are still full of life, and,as you perceive, possess the power of inflicting mortalinjury."

　　"My dear," said Madame de Villefort, who had just enteredthe room, "perhaps you exaggerate the evil."

　　"Good-morning, madame," said the count, bowing. Madame deVillefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her mostgracious smiles. "What is this that M. de Villefort has beentelling me?" demanded Monte Cristo "and whatincomprehensible misfortune" --

　　"Incomprehensible is not the word," interrupted theprocureur, shrugging his shoulders. "It is an old man'scaprice."

　　"And is there no means of making him revoke his decision?"

　　"Yes," said Madame de Villefort; "and it is still entirelyin the power of my husband to cause the will, which is nowin prejudice of Valentine, to be altered in her favor." Thecount, who perceived that M. and Madame de Villefort werebeginning to speak in parables, appeared to pay no attentionto the conversation, and feigned to be busily engaged inwatching Edward, who was mischievously pouring some ink intothe bird's water-glass. "My dear," said Villefort, in answerto his wife, "you know I have never been accustomed to playthe patriarch in my family, nor have I ever considered thatthe fate of a universe was to be decided by my nod.Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should berespected in my family, and that the folly of an old man andthe caprice of a child should not be allowed to overturn aproject which I have entertained for so many years. TheBaron d'Epinay was my friend, as you know, and an alliancewith his son is the most suitable thing that could possiblybe arranged."

　　"Do you think," said Madame de Villefort, "that Valentine isin league with him? She has always been opposed to thismarriage, and I should not be at all surprised if what wehave just seen and heard is nothing but the execution of aplan concerted between them."

　　"Madame," said Villefort, "believe me, a fortune of 900,000francs is not so easily renounced."

　　"She could, nevertheless, make up her mind to renounce theworld, sir, since it is only about a year ago that sheherself proposed entering a convent."

　　"Never mind," replied Villefort; "I say that this marriageshall be consummated."

　　"Notwithstanding your father's wishes to the contrary?" saidMadame de Villefort, selecting a new point of attack. "Thatis a serious thing." Monte Cristo, who pretended not to belistening, heard however, every word that was said."Madame," replied Villefort "I can truly say that I havealways entertained a high respect for my father, because, tothe natural feeling of relationship was added theconsciousness of his moral superiority. The name of fatheris sacred in two senses; he should be reverenced as theauthor of our being and as a master whom we ought to obey.But, under the present circumstances, I am justified indoubting the wisdom of an old man who, because he hated thefather, vents his anger on the son. It would be ridiculousin me to regulate my conduct by such caprices. I shall stillcontinue to preserve the same respect toward M. Noirtier; Iwill suffer, without complaint, the pecuniary deprivation towhich he has subjected me; but I shall remain firm in mydetermination, and the world shall see which party hisreason on his side. Consequently I shall marry my daughterto the Baron Franz d'Epinay, because I consider it would bea proper and eligible match for her to make, and, in short,because I choose to bestow my daughter's hand on whomever Iplease."

　　"What?" said the count, the approbation of whose eyeVillefort had frequently solicited during this speech."What? Do you say that M. Noirtier disinherits Mademoisellede Villefort because she is going to marry M. le Baron Franzd'Epinay?"

　　"Yes, sir, that is the reason," said Villefort, shrugginghis shoulders.

　　"The apparent reason, at least," said Madame de Villefort.

　　"The real reason, madame, I can assure you; I know myfather."

　　"But I want to know in what way M. d'Epinay can havedispleased your father more than any other person?"

　　"I believe I know M. Franz d'Epinay," said the count; "is henot the son of General de Quesnel, who was created Barond'Epinay by Charles X.?"

　　"The same," said Villefort.

　　"Well, but he is a charming young man, according to myideas."

　　"He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse ofM. Noirtier to prevent his granddaughter marrying; old menare always so selfish in their affection," said Madame deVillefort.

　　"But," said Monte Cristo "do you not know any cause for thishatred?"

　　"Ah, ma foi, who is to know?"

　　"Perhaps it is some political difference?"

　　"My father and the Baron d'Epinay lived in the stormy timesof which I only saw the ending," said Villefort.

　　"Was not your father a Bonapartist?" asked Monte Cristo; "Ithink I remember that you told me something of that kind."

　　"My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else," saidVillefort, carried by his emotion beyond the bounds ofprudence; "and the senator's robe, which Napoleon cast onhis shoulders, only served to disguise the old man withoutin any degree changing him. When my father conspired, it wasnot for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for M.Noirtier possessed this peculiarity, he never projected anyUtopian schemes which could never be realized, but strovefor possibilities, and he applied to the realization ofthese possibilities the terrible theories of The Mountain,-- theories that never shrank from any means that weredeemed necessary to bring about the desired result."

　　"Well," said Monte Cristo, "it is just as I thought; it waspolitics which brought Noirtier and M. d'Epinay intopersonal contact. Although General d'Epinay served underNapoleon, did he not still retain royalist sentiments? Andwas he not the person who was assassinated one evening onleaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invitedon the supposition that he favored the cause of theemperor?" Villefort looked at the count almost with terror."Am I mistaken, then?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated,"said Madame de Villefort; "and it was to prevent the renewalof old feuds that M. de Villefort formed the idea of unitingin the bonds of affection the two children of theseinveterate enemies."

　　"It was a sublime and charitable thought," said MonteCristo, "and the whole world should applaud it. It would benoble to see Mademoiselle Noirtier de Villefort assuming thetitle of Madame Franz d'Epinay." Villefort shuddered andlooked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read in hiscountenance the real feelings which had dictated the wordshe had just uttered. But the count completely baffled theprocureur, and prevented him from discovering anythingbeneath the never-varying smile he was so constantly in thehabit of assuming. "Although," said Villefort, "it will be aserious thing for Valentine to lose her grandfather'sfortune, I do not think that M. d'Epinay will be frightenedat this pecuniary loss. He will, perhaps, hold me in greateresteem than the money itself, seeing that I sacrificeeverything in order to keep my word with him. Besides, heknows that Valentine is rich in right of her mother, andthat she will, in all probability, inherit the fortune of M.and Madame de Saint-Meran, her mother's parents, who bothlove her tenderly."

　　"And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M.Noirtier," said Madame de Villefort; "besides, they are tocome to Paris in about a month, and Valentine, after theaffront she has received, need not consider it necessary tocontinue to bury herself alive by being shut up with M.Noirtier." The count listened with satisfaction to this taleof wounded self-love and defeated ambition. "But it seems tome," said Monte Cristo, "and I must begin by asking yourpardon for what I am about to say, that if M. Noirtierdisinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is goingto marry a man whose father he detested, he cannot have thesame cause of complaint against this dear Edward."

　　"True," said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation ofvoice which it is impossible to describe; "is it not unjust-- shamefully unjust? Poor Edward is as much M. Noirtier'sgrandchild as Valentine, and yet, if she had not been goingto marry M. Franz, M. Noirtier would have left her all hismoney; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by hergrandfather, she will still be three times richer than he."The count listened and said no more. "Count," saidVillefort, "we will not entertain you any longer with ourfamily misfortunes. It is true that my patrimony will go toendow charitable institutions, and my father will havedeprived me of my lawful inheritance without any reason fordoing so, but I shall have the satisfaction of knowing thatI have acted like a man of sense and feeling. M. d'Epinay,to whom I had promised the interest of this sum, shallreceive it, even if I endure the most cruel privations."

　　"However," said Madame de Villefort, returning to the oneidea which incessantly occupied her mind, "perhaps it wouldbe better to explain this unlucky affair to M. d'Epinay, inorder to give him the opportunity of himself renouncing hisclaim to the hand of Mademoiselle de Villefort."

　　"Ah, that would be a great pity," said Villefort.

　　"A great pity," said Monte Cristo.

　　"Undoubtedly," said Villefort, moderating the tones of hisvoice, "a marriage once concerted and then broken off,throws a sort of discredit on a young lady; then again, theold reports, which I was so anxious to put an end to, willinstantly gain ground. No, it will all go well; M. d'Epinay,if he is an honorable man, will consider himself more thanever pledged to Mademoiselle de Villefort, unless he wereactuated by a decided feeling of avarice, but that isimpossible."

　　"I agree with M. de Villefort," said Monte Cristo, fixinghis eyes on Madame de Villefort; "and if I were sufficientlyintimate with him to allow of giving my advice, I wouldpersuade him, since I have been told M. d'Epinay is comingback, to settle this affair at once beyond all possibilityof revocation. I will answer for the success of a projectwhich will reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort." Theprocureur arose, delighted with the proposition, but hiswife slightly changed color. "Well, that is all that Iwanted, and I will be guided by a counsellor such as youare," said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo."Therefore let every one here look upon what has passedto-day as if it had not happened, and as though we had neverthought of such a thing as a change in our original plans."

　　"Sir," said the count, "the world, unjust as it is, will bepleased with your resolution; your friends will be proud ofyou, and M. d'Epinay, even if he took Mademoiselle deVillefort without any dowry, which he will not do, would bedelighted with the idea of entering a family which couldmake such sacrifices in order to keep a promise and fulfil aduty." At the conclusion of these words, the count rose todepart. "Are you going to leave us, count?" said Madame deVillefort.

　　"I am sorry to say I must do so, madame, I only came toremind you of your promise for Saturday."

　　"Did you fear that we should forget it?"

　　"You are very good, madame, but M. de Villefort has so manyimportant and urgent occupations."

　　"My husband has given me his word, sir," said Madame deVillefort; "you have just seen him resolve to keep it whenhe has everything to lose, and surely there is more reasonfor his doing so where he has everything to gain."

　　"And," said Villefort, "is it at your house in theChamps-Elysees that you receive your visitors?"

　　"No," said Monte Cristo, "which is precisely the reasonwhich renders your kindness more meritorious, -- it is inthe country."

　　"In the country?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Where is it, then? Near Paris, is it not?"

　　"Very near, only half a league from the Barriers, -- it isat Auteuil."

　　"At Auteuil?" said Villefort; "true, Madame de Villeforttold me you lived at Auteuil, since it was to your housethat she was taken. And in what part of Auteuil do youreside?"

　　"Rue de la Fontaine."

　　"Rue de la Fontaine!" exclaimed Villefort in an agitatedtone; "at what number?"

　　"No. 28."

　　"Then," cried Villefort, "was it you who bought M. deSaint-Meran's house!"

　　"Did it belong to M. de Saint-Meran?" demanded Monte Cristo.

　　"Yes," replied Madame de Villefort; "and, would you believeit, count" --

　　"Believe what?"

　　"You think this house pretty, do you not?"

　　"I think it charming."

　　"Well, my husband would never live in it."

　　"Indeed?" returned Monte Cristo, "that is a prejudice onyour part, M. de Villefort, for which I am quite at a lossto account."

　　"I do not like Auteuil, sir," said the procureur, making anevident effort to appear calm.

　　"But I hope you will not carry your antipathy so far as todeprive me of the pleasure of your company, sir," said MonteCristo.

　　"No, count, -- I hope -- I assure you I shall do my best,"stammered Villefort.

　　"Oh," said Monte Cristo, "I allow of no excuse. On Saturday,at six o'clock. I shall be expecting you, and if you fail tocome, I shall think -- for how do I know to the contrary? --that this house, which his remained uninhabited for twentyyears, must have some gloomy tradition or dreadful legendconnected with it."

　　"I will come, count, -- I will be sure to come," saidVillefort eagerly.

　　"Thank you," said Monte Cristo; "now you must permit me totake my leave of you."

　　"You said before that you were obliged to leave us,monsieur," said Madame de Villefort, "and you were about totell us why when your attention was called to some othersubject."

　　"Indeed madame," said Monte Cristo: "I scarcely know if Idare tell you where I am going."

　　"Nonsense; say on."

　　"Well, then, it is to see a thing on which I have sometimesmused for hours together."

　　"What is it?"

　　"A telegraph. So now I have told my secret."

　　"A telegraph?" repeated Madame de Villefort.

　　"Yes, a telegraph. I had often seen one placed at the end ofa road on a hillock, and in the light of the sun its blackarms, bending in every direction, always reminded me of theclaws of an immense beetle, and I assure you it was neverwithout emotion that I gazed on it, for I could not helpthinking how wonderful it was that these various signsshould be made to cleave the air with such precision as toconvey to the distance of three hundred leagues the ideasand wishes of a man sitting at a table at one end of theline to another man similarly placed at the oppositeextremity, and all this effected by a simple act of volitionon the part of the sender of the message. I began to thinkof genii, sylphs, gnomes, in short, of all the ministers ofthe occult sciences, until I laughed aloud at the freaks ofmy own imagination. Now, it never occurred to me to wish fora nearer inspection of these large insects, with their longblack claws, for I always feared to find under their stonewings some little human genius fagged to death with cabals,factions, and government intrigues. But one fine day Ilearned that the mover of this telegraph was only a poorwretch, hired for twelve hundred francs a year, and employedall day, not in studying the heavens like an astronomer, orin gazing on the water like an angler, or even in enjoyingthe privilege of observing the country around him, but allhis monotonous life was passed in watching hiswhite-bellied, black-clawed fellow insect, four or fiveleagues distant from him. At length I felt a desire to studythis living chrysalis more closely, and to endeavor tounderstand the secret part played by these insect-actorswhen they occupy themselves simply with pulling differentpieces of string."

　　"And are you going there?"

　　"I am."

　　"What telegraph do you intend visiting? that of the homedepartment, or of the observatory?"

　　"Oh, no; I should find there people who would force me tounderstand things of which I would prefer to remainignorant, and who would try to explain to me, in spite ofmyself, a mystery which even they do not understand. Ma foi,I should wish to keep my illusions concerning insectsunimpaired; it is quite enough to have those dissipatedwhich I had formed of my fellow-creatures. I shall,therefore, not visit either of these telegraphs, but one inthe open country where I shall find a good-naturedsimpleton, who knows no more than the machine he is employedto work."

　　"You are a singular man," said Villefort.

　　"What line would you advise me to study?"

　　"The one that is most in use just at this time."

　　"The Spanish one, you mean, I suppose?"

　　"Yes; should you like a letter to the minister that theymight explain to you" --

　　"No," said Monte Cristo; "since, as I told you before, I donot wish to comprehend it. The moment I understand it therewill no longer exist a telegraph for me; it will he nothingmore than a sign from M. Duchatel, or from M. Montalivet,transmitted to the prefect of Bayonne, mystified by twoGreek words, tele, graphein. It is the insect with blackclaws, and the awful word which I wish to retain in myimagination in all its purity and all its importance."

　　"Go then; for in the course of two hours it will be dark,and you will not be able to see anything."

　　"Ma foi, you frighten me. Which is the nearest way?Bayonne?"

　　"Yes; the road to Bayonne."

　　"And afterwards the road to Chatillon?"

　　"Yes."

　　"By the tower of Montlhery, you mean?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Thank you. Good-by. On Saturday I will tell you myimpressions concerning the telegraph." At the door the countwas met by the two notaries, who had just completed the actwhich was to disinherit Valentine, and who were leavingunder the conviction of having done a thing which could notfail of redounding considerably to their credit.

　　Chapter 61How a Gardener may get rid of the Dormice that eat HisPeaches.

　　Not on the same night, as he had intended, but the nextmorning, the Count of Monte Cristo went out by the Barrierd'Enfer, taking the road to Orleans. Leaving the village ofLinas, without stopping at the telegraph, which flourishedits great bony arms as he passed, the count reached thetower of Montlhery, situated, as every one knows, upon thehighest point of the plain of that name. At the foot of thehill the count dismounted and began to ascend by a littlewinding path, about eighteen inches wide; when he reachedthe summit he found himself stopped by a hedge, upon whichgreen fruit had succeeded to red and white flowers.

　　Monte Cristo looked for the entrance to the enclosure, andwas not long in finding a little wooden gate, working onwillow hinges, and fastened with a nail and string. Thecount soon mastered the mechanism, the gate opened, and hethen found himself in a little garden, about twenty feetlong by twelve wide, bounded on one side by part of thehedge, which contained the ingenious contrivance we havecalled a gate, and on the other by the old tower, coveredwith ivy and studded with wall-flowers. No one would havethought in looking at this old, weather-beaten,floral-decked tower (which might be likened to an elderlydame dressed up to receive her grandchildren at a birthdayfeast) that it would have been capable of telling strangethings, if, -- in addition to the menacing ears which theproverb says all walls are provided with, -- it had also avoice. The garden was crossed by a path of red gravel, edgedby a border of thick box, of many years' growth, and of atone and color that would have delighted the heart ofDelacroix, our modern Rubens. This path was formed in theshape of the figure of 8, thus, in its windings, making awalk of sixty feet in a garden of only twenty.

　　Never had Flora, the fresh and smiling goddess of gardeners,been honored with a purer or more scrupulous worship thanthat which was paid to her in this little enclosure. Infact, of the twenty rose-trees which formed the parterre,not one bore the mark of the slug, nor were there evidencesanywhere of the clustering aphis which is so destructive toplants growing in a damp soil. And yet it was not becausethe damp had been excluded from the garden; the earth, blackas soot, the thick foliage of the trees betrayed itspresence; besides, had natural humidity been wanting, itcould have been immediately supplied by artificial means,thanks to a tank of water, sunk in one of the corners of thegarden, and upon which were stationed a frog and a toad,who, from antipathy, no doubt, always remained on the twoopposite sides of the basin. There was not a blade of grassto be seen in the paths, or a weed in the flower-beds; nofine lady ever trained and watered her geraniums, her cacti,and her rhododendrons, with more pains than this hithertounseen gardener bestowed upon his little enclosure. MonteCristo stopped after having closed the gate and fastened thestring to the nail, and cast a look around.

　　"The man at the telegraph," said he, "must either engage agardener or devote himself passionately to agriculture."Suddenly he struck against something crouching behind awheelbarrow filled with leaves; the something rose, utteringan exclamation of astonishment, and Monte Cristo foundhimself facing a man about fifty years old, who was pluckingstrawberries, which he was placing upon grape leaves. He hadtwelve leaves and about as many strawberries, which, onrising suddenly, he let fall from his hand. "You aregathering your crop, sir?" said Monte Cristo, smiling.

　　"Excuse me, sir," replied the man, raising his hand to hiscap; "I am not up there, I know, but I have only just comedown."

　　"Do not let me interfere with you in anything, my friend,"said the count; "gather your strawberries, if, indeed, thereare any left."

　　"I have ten left," said the man, "for here are eleven, and Ihad twenty-one, five more than last year. But I am notsurprised; the spring has been warm this year, andstrawberries require heat, sir. This is the reason that,instead of the sixteen I had last year, I have this year,you see, eleven, already plucked -- twelve, thirteen,fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen. Ah, I missthree, they were here last night, sir -- I am sure they werehere -- I counted them. It must be the Mere Simon's son whohas stolen them; I saw him strolling about here thismorning. Ah, the young rascal -- stealing in a garden -- hedoes not know where that may lead him to."

　　"Certainly, it is wrong," said Monte Cristo, "but you shouldtake into consideration the youth and greediness of thedelinquent."

　　"Of course," said the gardener, "but that does not make itthe less unpleasant. But, sir, once more I beg pardon;perhaps you are an officer that I am detaining here." And heglanced timidly at the count's blue coat.

　　"Calm yourself, my friend," said the count, with the smilewhich he made at will either terrible or benevolent, andwhich now expressed only the kindliest feeling; "I am not aninspector, but a traveller, brought here by a curiosity hehalf repents of, since he causes you to lose your time."

　　"Ah, my time is not valuable," replied the man with amelancholy smile. "Still it belongs to government, and Iought not to waste it; but, having received the signal thatI might rest for an hour" (here he glanced at the sun-dial,for there was everything in the enclosure of Montlhery, evena sun-dial), "and having ten minutes before me, and mystrawberries being ripe, when a day longer -- by-the-by,sir, do you think dormice eat them?"

　　"Indeed, I should think not," replied Monte Cristo; "dormiceare bad neighbors for us who do not eat them preserved, asthe Romans did."

　　"What? Did the Romans eat them?" said the gardener -- "atedormice?"

　　"I have read so in Petronius," said the count.

　　"Really? They can't be nice, though they do say `as fat as adormouse.' It is not a wonder they are fat, sleeping allday, and only waking to eat all night. Listen. Last year Ihad four apricots -- they stole one, I had one nectarine,only one -- well, sir, they ate half of it on the wall; asplendid nectarine -- I never ate a better."

　　"You ate it?"

　　"That is to say, the half that was left -- you understand;it was exquisite, sir. Ah, those gentlemen never choose theworst morsels; like Mere Simon's son, who has not chosen theworst strawberries. But this year," continued thehorticulturist, "I'll take care it shall not happen, even ifI should be forced to sit by the whole night to watch whenthe strawberries are ripe." Monte Cristo had seen enough.Every man has a devouring passion in his heart, as everyfruit has its worm; that of the telegraph man washorticulture. He began gathering the grape-leaves whichscreened the sun from the grapes, and won the heart of thegardener. "Did you come here, sir, to see the telegraph?" hesaid.

　　"Yes, if it isn't contrary to the rules."

　　"Oh, no," said the gardener; "not in the least, since thereis no danger that anyone can possibly understand what we aresaying."

　　"I have been told," said the count, "that you do not alwaysyourselves understand the signals you repeat."

　　"That is true, sir, and that is what I like best," said theman, smiling.

　　"Why do you like that best?"

　　"Because then I have no responsibility. I am a machine then,and nothing else, and so long as I work, nothing more isrequired of me."

　　"Is it possible," said Monte Cristo to himself, "that I canhave met with a man that has no ambition? That would spoilmy plans."

　　"Sir," said the gardener, glancing at the sun-dial, "the tenminutes are almost up; I must return to my post. Will you goup with me?"

　　"I follow you." Monte Cristo entered the tower, which wasdivided into three stories. The tower contained implements,such as spades, rakes, watering-pots, hung against the wall;this was all the furniture. The second was the man'sconventional abode, or rather sleeping-place; it contained afew poor articles of household furniture -- a bed, a table,two chairs, a stone pitcher -- and some dry herbs, hung upto the ceiling, which the count recognized as sweet pease,and of which the good man was preserving the seeds; he hadlabelled them with as much care as if he had been masterbotanist in the Jardin des Plantes.

　　"Does it require much study to learn the art oftelegraphing?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"The study does not take long; it was acting as asupernumerary that was so tedious."

　　"And what is the pay?"

　　"A thousand francs, sir."

　　"It is nothing."

　　"No; but then we are lodged, as you perceive."

　　Monte Cristo looked at the room. They passed to the thirdstory; it was the telegraph room. Monte Cristo looked inturn at the two iron handles by which the machine wasworked. "It is very interesting," he said, "but it must bevery tedious for a lifetime."

　　"Yes. At first my neck was cramped with looking at it, butat the end of a year I became used to it; and then we haveour hours of recreation, and our holidays."

　　"Holidays?"

　　"Yes."

　　"When?"

　　"When we have a fog."

　　"Ah, to be sure."

　　"Those are indeed holidays to me; I go into the garden, Iplant, I prune, I trim, I kill the insects all day long."

　　"How long have you been here?"

　　"Ten years, and five as a supernumerary make fifteen."

　　"You are -- "

　　"Fifty-five years old."

　　"How long must you have served to claim the pension?"

　　"Oh, sir, twenty-five years."

　　"And how much is the pension?"

　　"A hundred crowns."

　　"Poor humanity!" murmured Monte Cristo.

　　"What did you say, sir?" asked the man.

　　"I was saying it was very interesting."

　　"What was?"

　　"All you were showing me. And you really understand none ofthese signals?"

　　"None at all."

　　"And have you never tried to understand them?"

　　"Never. Why should I?"

　　"But still there are some signals only addressed to you."

　　"Certainly."

　　"And do you understand them?"

　　"They are always the same."

　　"And they mean -- "

　　"Nothing new; You have an hour; or To-morrow."

　　"This is simple enough," said the count; "but look, is notyour correspondent putting itself in motion?"

　　"Ah, yes; thank you, sir."

　　"And what is it saying -- anything you understand?"

　　"Yes; it asks if I am ready."

　　"And you reply?"

　　"By the same sign, which, at the same time, tells myright-hand correspondent that I am ready, while it givesnotice to my left-hand correspondent to prepare in histurn."

　　"It is very ingenious," said the count.

　　"You will see," said the man proudly; "in five minutes hewill speak."

　　"I have, then, five minutes," said Monte Cristo to himself;"it is more time than I require. My dear sir, will you allowme to ask you a question?"

　　"What is it, sir?"

　　"You are fond of gardening?"

　　"Passionately."

　　"And you would be pleased to have, instead of this terraceof twenty feet, an enclosure of two acres?"

　　"Sir, I should make a terrestrial paradise of it."

　　"You live badly on your thousand francs?"

　　"Badly enough; but yet I do live."

　　"Yes; but you have a wretchedly small garden."

　　"True, the garden is not large."

　　"And, then, such as it is, it is filled with dormice, whoeat everything."

　　"Ah, they are my scourges."

　　"Tell me, should you have the misfortune to turn your headwhile your right-hand correspondent was telegraphing" --

　　"I should not see him."

　　"Then what would happen?"

　　"I could not repeat the signals."

　　"And then?"

　　"Not having repeated them, through negligence, I should befined."

　　"How much?"

　　"A hundred francs."

　　"The tenth of your income -- that would be fine work."

　　"Ah," said the man.

　　"Has it ever happened to you?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Once, sir, when I was grafting a rose-tree."

　　"Well, suppose you were to alter a signal, and substituteanother?"

　　"Ah, that is another case; I should be turned off, and losemy pension."

　　"Three hundred francs?"

　　"A hundred crowns, yes, sir; so you see that I am not likelyto do any of these things."

　　"Not even for fifteen years' wages? Come, it is worththinking about?"

　　"For fifteen thousand francs?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Sir, you alarm me."

　　"Nonsense."

　　"Sir, you are tempting me?"

　　"Just so; fifteen thousand francs, do you understand?"

　　"Sir, let me see my right-hand correspondent."

　　"On the contrary, do not look at him, but at this."

　　"What is it?"

　　"What? Do you not know these bits of paper?"

　　"Bank-notes!"

　　"Exactly; there are fifteen of them."

　　"And whose are they?"

　　"Yours, if you like."

　　"Mine?" exclaimed the man, half-suffocated.

　　"Yes; yours -- your own property."

　　"Sir, my right-hand correspondent is signalling."

　　"Let him signal."

　　"Sir, you have distracted me; I shall be fined."

　　"That will cost you a hundred francs; you see it is yourinterest to take my bank-notes."

　　"Sir, my right-hand correspondent redoubles his signals; heis impatient."

　　"Never mind -- take these;" and the count placed the packetin the man's hands. "Now this is not all," he said; "youcannot live upon your fifteen thousand francs."

　　"I shall still have my place."

　　"No, you will lose it, for you are going to alter yourcorrespondent's message."

　　"Oh, sir, what are you proposing?"

　　"A jest."

　　"Sir, unless you force me" --

　　"I think I can effectually force you;" and Monte Cristo drewanother packet from his pocket. "Here are ten thousand morefrancs," he said, "with the fifteen thousand already in yourpocket, they will make twenty-five thousand. With fivethousand you can buy a pretty little house with two acres ofland; the remaining twenty thousand will bring you in athousand francs a year."

　　"A garden with two acres of land!"

　　"And a thousand francs a year."

　　"Oh, heavens!"

　　"Come, take them," and Monte Cristo forced the bank-notesinto his hand.

　　"What am I to do?"

　　"Nothing very difficult."

　　"But what is it?"

　　"To repeat these signs." Monte Cristo took a paper from hispocket, upon which were drawn three signs, with numbers toindicate the order in which they were to be worked.

　　"There, you see it will not take long."

　　"Yes; but" --

　　"Do this, and you will have nectarines and all the rest."The shot told; red with fever, while the large drops fellfrom his brow, the man executed, one after the other, thethree signs given by the count, in spite of the frightfulcontortions of the right-hand correspondent, who, notunderstanding the change, began to think the gardener hadgone mad. As to the left-hand one, he conscientiouslyrepeated the same signals, which were finally transmitted tothe Minister of the Interior. "Now you are rich," said MonteCristo.

　　"Yes," replied the man, "but at what a price!"

　　"Listen, friend," said Monte Cristo. "I do not wish to causeyou any remorse; believe me, then, when I swear to you thatyou have wronged no man, but on the contrary have benefitedmankind." The man looked at the bank-notes, felt them,counted them, turned pale, then red, then rushed into hisroom to drink a glass of water, but he had no time to reachthe water-jug, and fainted in the midst of his dried herbs.Five minutes after the new telegram reached the minister,Debray had the horses put to his carriage, and drove toDanglars' house.

　　"Has your husband any Spanish bonds?" he asked of thebaroness.

　　"I think so, indeed! He has six millions' worth."

　　"He must sell them at whatever price."

　　"Why?"

　　"Because Don Carlos has fled from Bourges, and has returnedto Spain."

　　"How do you know?" Debray shrugged his shoulders. "The ideaof asking how I hear the news," he said. The baroness didnot wait for a repetition; she ran to her husband, whoimmediately hastened to his agent, and ordered him to sellat any price. When it was seen that Danglars sold, theSpanish funds fell directly. Danglars lost five hundredthousand francs; but he rid himself of all his Spanishshares. The same evening the following was read in LeMessager:

　　"[By telegraph.] The king, Don Carlos, has escaped thevigilance of his guardians at Bourges, and has returned toSpain by the Catalonian frontier. Barcelona has risen in hisfavor."

　　All that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight ofDanglars, who had sold his shares, and of the luck of thestock-jobber, who only lost five hundred thousand francs bysuch a blow. Those who had kept their shares, or boughtthose of Danglars, looked upon themselves as ruined, andpassed a very bad night. Next morning Le Moniteur containedthe following:

　　"It was without any foundation that Le Messager yesterdayannounced the flight of Don Carlos and the revolt ofBarcelona. The king (Don Carlos) has not left Bourges, andthe peninsula is in the enjoyment of profound peace. Atelegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to thefog, was the cause of this error."

　　The funds rose one per cent higher than before they hadfallen. This, reckoning his loss, and what he had missedgaining, made the difference of a million to Danglars."Good," said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his housewhen the news arrived of the strange reverse of fortune ofwhich Danglars's had been the victim, "I have just made adiscovery for twenty-five thousand francs, for which I wouldhave paid a hundred thousand."

　　"What have you discovered?" asked Morrel.

　　"I have just discovered how a gardener may get rid of thedormice that eat his peaches."

　　Chapter 62Ghosts.

　　At first sight the exterior of the house at Auteuil gave noindications of splendor, nothing one would expect from thedestined residence of the magnificent Count of Monte Cristo;but this simplicity was according to the will of its master,who positively ordered nothing to be altered outside. Thesplendor was within. Indeed, almost before the door opened,the scene changed. M. Bertuccio had outdone himself in thetaste displayed in furnishing, and in the rapidity withwhich it was executed. It is told that the Duc d'Antinremoved in a single night a whole avenue of trees thatannoyed Louis XIV.; in three days M. Bertuccio planted anentirely bare court with poplars, large spreading sycamoresto shade the different parts of the house, and in theforeground, instead of the usual paving-stones, half hiddenby the grass, there extended a lawn but that morning laiddown, and upon which the water was yet glistening. For therest, the orders had been issued by the count; he himselfhad given a plan to Bertuccio, marking the spot where eachtree was to be planted, and the shape and extent of the lawnwhich was to take the place of the paving-stones. Thus thehouse had become unrecognizable, and Bertuccio himselfdeclared that he scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by aframework of trees. The overseer would not have objected,while he was about it, to have made some improvements in thegarden, but the count had positively forbidden it to betouched. Bertuccio made amends, however, by loading theante-chambers, staircases, and mantle-pieces with flowers.

　　What, above all, manifested the shrewdness of the steward,and the profound science of the master, the one in carryingout the ideas of the other, was that this house whichappeared only the night before so sad and gloomy,impregnated with that sickly smell one can almost fancy tobe the smell of time, had in a single day acquired theaspect of life, was scented with its master's favoriteperfumes, and had the very light regulated according to hiswish. When the count arrived, he had under his touch hisbooks and arms, his eyes rested upon his favorite pictures;his dogs, whose caresses he loved, welcomed him in theante-chamber; the birds, whose songs delighted him, cheeredhim with their music; and the house, awakened from it's longsleep, like the sleeping beauty in the wood, lived, sang,and bloomed like the houses we have long cherished, and inwhich, when we are forced to leave them, we leave a part ofour souls. The servants passed gayly along the finecourt-yard; some, belonging to the kitchens, gliding downthe stairs, restored but the previous day, as if they hadalways inhabited the house; others filling the coach-houses,where the equipages, encased and numbered, appeared to havebeen installed for the last fifty years; and in the stablesthe horses replied with neighs to the grooms, who spoke tothem with much more respect than many servants pay theirmasters.

　　The library was divided into two parts on either side of thewall, and contained upwards of two thousand volumes; onedivision was entirely devoted to novels, and even the volumewhich had been published but the day before was to be seenin its place in all the dignity of its red and gold binding.On the other side of the house, to match with the library,was the conservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, thatbloomed in china jars; and in the midst of the greenhouse,marvellous alike to sight and smell, was a billiard-tablewhich looked as if it had been abandoned during the pasthour by players who had left the balls on the cloth. Onechamber alone had been respected by the magnificentBertuccio. Before this room, to which you could ascend bythe grand, and go out by the back staircase, the servantspassed with curiosity, and Bertuccio with terror. At fiveo'clock precisely, the count arrived before the house atAuteuil, followed by Ali. Bertuccio was awaiting thisarrival with impatience, mingled with uneasiness; he hopedfor some compliments, while, at the same time, he feared tohave frowns. Monte Cristo descended into the courtyard,walked all over the house, without giving any sign ofapprobation or pleasure, until he entered his bedroom,situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then heapproached a little piece of furniture, made of rosewood,which he had noticed at a previous visit. "That can only beto hold gloves," he said.

　　"Will your excellency deign to open it?" said the delightedBertuccio, "and you will find gloves in it." Elsewhere thecount found everything he required -- smelling-bottles,cigars, knick-knacks.

　　"Good," he said; and M. Bertuccio left enraptured, so great,so powerful, and real was the influence exercised by thisman over all who surrounded him. At precisely six o'clockthe clatter of horses' hoofs was heard at the entrance door;it was our captain of Spahis, who had arrived on Medeah. "Iam sure I am the first," cried Morrel; "I did it on purposeto have you a minute to myself, before every one came. Julieand Emmanuel have a thousand things to tell you. Ah, reallythis is magnificent! But tell me, count, will your peopletake care of my horse?"

　　"Do not alarm yourself, my dear Maximilian -- theyunderstand."

　　"I mean, because he wants petting. If you had seen at what apace he came -- like the wind!"

　　"I should think so, -- a horse that cost 5,000 francs!" saidMonte Cristo, in the tone which a father would use towards ason.

　　"Do you regret them?" asked Morrel, with his open laugh.

　　"I? Certainly not," replied the count. "No; I should onlyregret if the horse had not proved good."

　　"It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Chateau-Renaud,one of the best riders in France, and M. Debray, who bothmount the minister's Arabians; and close on their heels arethe horses of Madame Danglars, who always go at six leaguesan hour."

　　"Then they follow you?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"See, they are here." And at the same minute a carriage withsmoking horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen,arrived at the gate, which opened before them. The carriagedrove round, and stopped at the steps, followed by thehorsemen. The instant Debray had touched the ground, he wasat the carriage-door. He offered his hand to the baroness,who, descending, took it with a peculiarity of mannerimperceptible to every one but Monte Cristo. But nothingescaped the count's notice, and he observed a little note,passed with the facility that indicates frequent practice,from the hand of Madame Danglars to that of the minister'ssecretary. After his wife the banker descended, as pale asthough he had issued from his tomb instead of his carriage.Madame Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance whichcould only be interpreted by Monte Cristo, around thecourt-yard, over the peristyle, and across the front of thehouse, then, repressing a slight emotion, which must havebeen seen on her countenance if she had not kept her color,she ascended the steps, saying to Morrel, "Sir, if you werea friend of mine, I should ask you if you would sell yourhorse."

　　Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, andthen turned round to Monte Cristo, as if to ask him toextricate him from his embarrassment. The count understoodhim. "Ah, madame," he said, "why did you not make thatrequest of me?"

　　"With you, sir," replied the baroness, "one can wish fornothing, one is so sure to obtain it. If it were so with M.Morrel" --

　　"Unfortunately," replied the count, "I am witness that M.Morrel cannot give up his horse, his honor being engaged inkeeping it."

　　"How so?"

　　"He laid a wager he would tame Medeah in the space of sixmonths. You understand now that if he were to get rid of theanimal before the time named, he would not only lose hisbet, but people would say he was afraid; and a brave captainof Spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify a pretty woman,which is, in my opinion, one of the most sacred obligationsin the world."

　　"You see my position, madame," said Morrel, bestowing agrateful smile on Monte Cristo.

　　"It seems to me," said Danglars, in his coarse tone,ill-concealed by a forced smile, "that you have already gothorses enough." Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks ofthis kind to pass unnoticed, but, to the surprise of theyoung people, she pretended not to hear it, and saidnothing. Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, andshowed her two immense porcelain jars, over which woundmarine plants, of a size and delicacy that nature alonecould produce. The baroness was astonished. "Why," said she,"you could plant one of the chestnut-trees in the Tuileriesinside! How can such enormous jars have been manufactured?"

　　"Ah, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "you must not ask of us,the manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question. It isthe work of another age, constructed by the genii of earthand water."

　　"How so? -- at what period can that have been?"

　　"I do not know; I have only heard that an emperor of Chinahad an oven built expressly, and that in this oven twelvejars like this were successively baked. Two broke, from theheat of the fire; the other ten were sunk three hundredfathoms deep into the sea. The sea, knowing what wasrequired of her, threw over them her weeds, encircled themwith coral, and encrusted them with shells; the whole wascemented by two hundred years beneath these almostimpervious depths, for a revolution carried away the emperorwho wished to make the trial, and only left the documentsproving the manufacture of the jars and their descent intothe sea. At the end of two hundred years the documents werefound, and they thought of bringing up the jars. Diversdescended in machines, made expressly on the discovery, intothe bay where they were thrown; but of ten three onlyremained, the rest having been broken by the waves. I amfond of these jars, upon which, perhaps, misshapen,frightful monsters have fixed their cold, dull eyes, and inwhich myriads of small fish have slept, seeking a refugefrom the pursuit of their enemies." Meanwhile, Danglars, whohad cared little for curiosities, was mechanically tearingoff the blossoms of a splendid orange-tree, one afteranother. When he had finished with the orange-tree, he beganat the cactus; but this, not being so easily plucked as theorange-tree, pricked him dreadfully. He shuddered, andrubbed his eyes as though awaking from a dream.

　　"Sir," said Monte Cristo to him, "I do not recommend mypictures to you, who possess such splendid paintings; but,nevertheless, here are two by Hobbema, a Paul Potter, aMieris, two by Gerard Douw, a Raphael, a Vandyke, aZurbaran, and two or three by Murillo, worth looking at."

　　"Stay," said Debray; "I recognize this Hobbema."

　　"Ah, indeed!"

　　"Yes; it was proposed for the Museum."

　　"Which, I believe, does not contain one?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"No; and yet they refused to buy it."

　　"Why?" said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"You pretend not to know, -- because government was not richenough."

　　"Ah, pardon me," said Chateau-Renaud; "I have heard of thesethings every day during the last eight years, and I cannotunderstand them yet."

　　"You will, by and by," said Debray.

　　"I think not," replied Chateau-Renaud.

　　"Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and Count Andrea Cavalcanti,"announced Baptistin. A black satin stock, fresh from themaker's hands, gray moustaches, a bold eye, a major'suniform, ornamented with three medals and five crosses -- infact, the thorough bearing of an old soldier -- such was theappearance of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, that tenderfather with whom we are already acquainted. Close to him,dressed in entirely new clothes, advanced smilingly CountAndrea Cavalcanti, the dutiful son, whom we also know. Thethree young people were talking together. On the entrance ofthe new comers, their eyes glanced from father to son, andthen, naturally enough, rested on the latter, whom theybegan criticising. "Cavalcanti!" said Debray. "A fine name,"said Morrel.

　　"Yes," said Chateau-Renaud, "these Italians are well namedand badly dressed."

　　"You are fastidious, Chateau-Renaud," replied Debray; "thoseclothes are well cut and quite new."

　　"That is just what I find fault with. That gentleman appearsto be well dressed for the first time in his life."

　　"Who are those gentlemen?" asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.

　　"You heard -- Cavalcanti."

　　"That tells me their name, and nothing else."

　　"Ah, true. You do not know the Italian nobility; theCavalcanti are all descended from princes."

　　"Have they any fortune?"

　　"An enormous one."

　　"What do they do?"

　　"Try to spend it all. They have some business with you, Ithink, from what they told me the day before yesterday. I,indeed, invited them here to-day on your account. I willintroduce you to them."

　　"But they appear to speak French with a very pure accent,"said Danglars.

　　"The son has been educated in a college in the south; Ibelieve near Marseilles. You will find him quiteenthusiastic."

　　"Upon what subject?" asked Madame Danglars.

　　"The French ladies, madame. He has made up his mind to takea wife from Paris."

　　"A fine idea that of his," said Danglars, shrugging hisshoulders. Madame Danglars looked at her husband with anexpression which, at any other time, would have indicated astorm, but for the second time she controlled herself. "Thebaron appears thoughtful to-day," said Monte Cristo to her;"are they going to put him in the ministry?"

　　"Not yet, I think. More likely he has been speculating onthe Bourse, and has lost money."

　　"M. and Madame de Villefort," cried Baptistin. They entered.M. de Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, wasvisibly affected, and when Monte Cristo touched his hand, hefelt it tremble. "Certainly, women alone know how todissimulate," said Monte Cristo to himself, glancing atMadame Danglars, who was smiling on the procureur, andembracing his wife. After a short time, the count sawBertuccio, who, until then, had been occupied on the otherside of the house, glide into an adjoining room. He went tohim. "What do you want, M. Bertuccio?" said he.

　　"Your excellency his not stated the number of guests."

　　"Ah, true."

　　"How many covers?"

　　"Count for yourself."

　　"Is every one here, your excellency?"

　　"Yes."

　　Bertuccio glanced through the door, which was ajar. Thecount watched him. "Good heavens!" he exclaimed.

　　"What is the matter?" said the count.

　　"That woman -- that woman!"

　　"Which?"

　　"The one with a white dress and so many diamonds -- the fairone."

　　"Madame Danglars?"

　　"I do not know her name; but it is she, sir, it is she!"

　　"Whom do you mean?"

　　"The woman of the garden! -- she that was enciente -- shewho was walking while she waited for" -- Bertuccio stood atthe open door, with his eyes starting and his hair on end.

　　"Waiting for whom?" Bertuccio, without answering, pointed toVillefort with something of the gesture Macbeth uses topoint out Banquo. "Oh, oh," he at length muttered, "do yousee?"

　　"What? Who?"

　　"Him!"

　　"Him! -- M. de Villefort, the king's attorney? Certainly Isee him."

　　"Then I did not kill him?"

　　"Really, I think you are going mad, good Bertuccio," saidthe count.

　　"Then he is not dead?"

　　"No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of strikingbetween the sixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymendo, you must have struck higher or lower, and life is verytenacious in these lawyers, or rather there is no truth inanything you have told me -- it was a fright of theimagination, a dream of your fancy. You went to sleep fullof thoughts of vengeance; they weighed heavily upon yourstomach; you had the nightmare -- that's all. Come, calmyourself, and reckon them up -- M. and Madame de Villefort,two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Chateau-Renaud, M.Debray, M. Morrel, seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,eight."

　　"Eight!" repeated Bertuccio.

　　"Stop! You are in a shocking hurry to be off -- you forgetone of my guests. Lean a little to the left. Stay! look atM. Andrea Cavalcanti, the young man in a black coat, lookingat Murillo's Madonna; now he is turning." This timeBertuccio would have uttered an exclamation, had not a lookfrom Monte Cristo silenced him. "Benedetto?" he muttered;"fatality!"

　　"Half-past six o'clock has just struck, M. Bertuccio," saidthe count severely; "I ordered dinner at that hour, and I donot like to wait;" and he returned to his guests, whileBertuccio, leaning against the wall, succeeded in reachingthe dining-room. Five minutes afterwards the doors of the.drawing-room were thrown open, and Bertuccio appearing said,with a violent effort, "The dinner waits."

　　The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame deVillefort. "M. de Villefort," he said, "will you conduct theBaroness Danglars?"

　　Villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room.

　　Chapter 63The Dinner.

　　It was evident that one sentiment affected all the guests onentering the dining-room. Each one asked what strangeinfluence had brought them to this house, and yetastonished, even uneasy though they were, they still feltthat they would not like to be absent. The recent events,the solitary and eccentric position of the count, hisenormous, nay, almost incredible fortune, should have mademen cautious, and have altogether prevented ladies visitinga house where there was no one of their own sex to receivethem; and yet curiosity had been enough to lead them tooverleap the bounds of prudence and decorum. And allpresent, even including Cavalcanti and his son,notwithstanding the stiffness of the one and thecarelessness of the other, were thoughtful, on findingthemselves assembled at the house of this incomprehensibleman. Madame Danglars had started when Villefort, on thecount's invitation, offered his arm; and Villefort felt thathis glance was uneasy beneath his gold spectacles, when hefelt the arm of the baroness press upon his own. None ofthis had escaped the count, and even by this mere contact ofindividuals the scene had already acquired considerableinterest for an observer. M. de Villefort had on the righthand Madame Danglars, on his left Morrel. The count wasseated between Madame de Villefort and Danglars; the otherseats were filled by Debray, who was placed between the twoCavalcanti, and by Chateau-Renaud, seated between Madame deVillefort and Morrel.

　　The repast was magnificent; Monte Cristo had endeavoredcompletely to overturn the Parisian ideas, and to feed thecuriosity as much as the appetite of his guests. It was anOriental feast that he offered to them, but of such a kindas the Arabian fairies might be supposed to prepare. Everydelicious fruit that the four quarters of the globe couldprovide was heaped in vases from China and jars from Japan.Rare birds, retaining their most brilliant plumage, enormousfish, spread upon massive silver dishes, together with everywine produced in the Archipelago, Asia Minor, or the Cape,sparkling in bottles, whose grotesque shape seemed to givean additional flavor to the draught, -- all these, like oneof the displays with which Apicius of old gratified hisguests, passed in review before the eyes of the astonishedParisians, who understood that it was possible to expend athousand louis upon a dinner for ten persons, but only onthe condition of eating pearls, like Cleopatra, or drinkingrefined gold, like Lorenzo de' Medici.

　　Monte Cristo noticed the general astonishment, and beganlaughing and joking about it. "Gentlemen," he said, "youwill admit that, when arrived at a certain degree offortune, the superfluities of life are all that can bedesired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risento a certain eminence of position, the ideal alone can bemore exalted. Now, to follow out this reasoning, what is themarvellous? -- that which we do not understand. What is itthat we really desire? -- that which we cannot obtain. Now,to see things which I cannot understand, to procureimpossibilities, these are the study of my life. I gratifymy wishes by two means -- my will and my money. I take asmuch interest in the pursuit of some whim as you do, M.Danglars, in promoting a new railway line; you, M. deVillefort, in condemning a culprit to death; you, M. Debray,in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Chateau-Renaud, inpleasing a woman; and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse thatno one can ride. For example, you see these two fish; onebrought fifty leagues beyond St. Petersburg, the other fiveleagues from Naples. Is it not amusing to see them both onthe same table?"

　　"What are the two fish?" asked Danglars.

　　"M. Chateau-Renaud, who has lived in Russia, will tell youthe name of one, and Major Cavalcanti, who is an Italian,will tell you the name of the other."

　　"This one is, I think, a sterlet," said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"And that one, if I mistake not, a lamprey."

　　"Just so. Now, M. Danglars, ask these gentlemen where theyare caught."

　　"Starlets," said Chateau-Renaud, "are only found in theVolga."

　　"And," said Cavalcanti, "I know that Lake Fusaro alonesupplies lampreys of that size."

　　"Exactly; one comes from the Volga, and the other from LakeFusaro."

　　"Impossible!" cried all the guests simultaneously.

　　"Well, this is just what amuses me," said Monte Cristo. "Iam like Nero -- cupitor impossibilium; and that is what isamusing you at this moment. This fish, which seems soexquisite to you, is very likely no better than perch orsalmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it, and here itis."

　　"But how could you have these fish brought to France?"

　　"Oh, nothing more easy. Each fish was brought over in a cask-- one filled with river herbs and weeds, the other withrushes and lake plants; they were placed in a wagon built onpurpose, and thus the sterlet lived twelve days, the lampreyeight, and both were alive when my cook seized them, killingone with milk and the other with wine. You do not believeme, M. Danglars!"

　　"I cannot help doubting," answered Danglars with his stupidsmile.

　　"Baptistin," said the count, "have the other fish brought in-- the sterlet and the lamprey which came in the othercasks, and which are yet alive." Danglars opened hisbewildered eyes; the company clapped their hands. Fourservants carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants,and in each of which was breathing a fish similar to thoseon the table.

　　"But why have two of each sort?" asked Danglars.

　　"Merely because one might have died," carelessly answeredMonte Cristo.

　　"You are certainly an extraordinary man," said Danglars;"and philosophers may well say it is a fine thing to berich."

　　"And to have ideas," added Madame Danglars.

　　"Oh, do not give me credit for this, madame; it was done bythe Romans, who much esteemed them, and Pliny relates thatthey sent slaves from Ostia to Rome, who carried on theirheads fish which he calls the mulus, and which, from thedescription, must probably be the goldfish. It was alsoconsidered a luxury to have them alive, it being an amusingsight to see them die, for, when dying, they change colorthree or four times, and like the rainbow when itdisappears, pass through all the prismatic shades, afterwhich they were sent to the kitchen. Their agony formed partof their merit -- if they were not seen alive, they weredespised when dead."

　　"Yes," said Debray, "but then Ostia is only a few leaguesfrom Rome."

　　"True," said Monte Cristo; "but what would be the use ofliving eighteen hundred years after Lucullus. if we can dono better than he could?" The two Cavalcanti opened theirenormous eyes, but had the good sense not to say anything."All this is very extraordinary," said Chateau-Renaud;"still, what I admire the most, I confess, is the marvellouspromptitude with which your orders are executed. Is it nottrue that you only bought this house five or six days ago?"

　　"Certainly not longer."

　　"Well, I am sure it is quite transformed since last week. IfI remember rightly, it had another entrance, and thecourt-yard was paved and empty; while to-day we have asplendid lawn, bordered by trees which appear to be ahundred years old."

　　"Why not? I am fond of grass and shade," said Monte Cristo.

　　"Yes," said Madame de Villefort, "the door was towards theroad before, and on the day of my miraculous escape youbrought me into the house from the road, I remember."

　　"Yes, madame," said Monte Cristo; "but I preferred having anentrance which would allow me to see the Bois de Boulogneover my gate."

　　"In four days," said Morrel; "it is extraordinary!"

　　"Indeed," said Chateau-Renaud, "it seems quite miraculous tomake a new house out of an old one; for it was very old, anddull too. I recollect coming for my mother to look at itwhen M. de Saint-Meran advertised it for sale two or threeyears ago."

　　"M. de Saint-Meran?" said Madame de Villefort; "then thishouse belonged to M. de Saint-Meran before you bought it?"

　　"It appears so," replied Monte Cristo.

　　"Is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchasedit?"

　　"Quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me."

　　"It is certainly ten years since the house had beenoccupied," said Chateau-Renaud, "and it was quite melancholyto look at it, with the blinds closed, the doors locked, andthe weeds in the court. Really, if the house had notbelonged to the father-in-law of the procureur, one mighthave thought it some accursed place where a horrible crimehad been committed." Villefort, who had hitherto not tastedthe three or four glasses of rare wine which were placedbefore him, here took one, and drank it off. Monte Cristoallowed a short time to elapse, and then said, "It issingular, baron, but the same idea came across me the firsttime I came here; it looked so gloomy I should never havebought it if my steward had not taken the matter into hisown hands. Perhaps the fellow had been bribed by thenotary."

　　"It is probable," stammered out Villefort, trying to smile;"but I can assure you that I had nothing to do with any suchproceeding. This house is part of Valentine'smarriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Meran wished to sell it;for if it had remained another year or two uninhabited itwould have fallen to ruin." It was Morrel's turn to becomepale.

　　"There was, above all, one room," continued Monte Cristo,"very plain in appearance, hung with red damask, which, Iknow not why, appeared to me quite dramatic."

　　"Why so?" said Danglars; "why dramatic?"

　　"Can we account for instinct?" said Monte Cristo. "Are therenot some places where we seem to breathe sadness? -- why, wecannot tell. It is a chain of recollections -- an idea whichcarries you back to other times, to other places -- which,very likely, have no connection with the present time andplace. And there is something in this room which reminds meforcibly of the chamber of the Marquise de Ganges* orDesdemona. Stay, since we have finished dinner, I will showit to you, and then we will take coffee in the garden. Afterdinner, the play." Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at hisguests. Madame de Villefort rose, Monte Cristo did the same,and the rest followed their example. Villefort and MadameDanglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to their seats;they questioned each other with vague and stupid glances."Did you hear?" said Madame Danglars.

　　* Elisabeth de Rossan, Marquise de Ganges, was one of thefamous women of the court of Louis XIV. where she was knownas "La Belle Provencale." She was the widow of the Marquisede Castellane when she married de Ganges, and having themisfortune to excite the enmity of her new brothers-in-law,was forced by them to take poison; and they finished her offwith pistol and dagger. -- Ed.

　　"We must go," replied Villefort, offering his arm. Theothers, attracted by curiosity, were already scattered indifferent parts of the house; for they thought the visitwould not be limited to the one room, and that, at the sametime, they would obtain a view of the rest of the building,of which Monte Cristo had created a palace. Each one wentout by the open doors. Monte Cristo waited for the two whoremained; then, when they had passed, he brought up therear, and on his face was a smile, which, if they could haveunderstood it, would have alarmed them much more than avisit to the room they were about to enter. They began bywalking through the apartments, many of which were fitted upin the Eastern style, with cushions and divans instead ofbeds, and pipes instead of furniture. The drawing-rooms weredecorated with the rarest pictures by the old masters, theboudoirs hung with draperies from China, of fanciful colors,fantastic design, and wonderful texture. At length theyarrived at the famous room. There was nothing particularabout it, excepting that, although daylight had disappeared,it was not lighted, and everything in it was old-fashioned,while the rest of the rooms had been redecorated. These twocauses were enough to give it a gloomy aspect. "Oh." criedMadame de Villefort, "it is really frightful." MadameDanglars tried to utter a few words, but was not heard. Manyobservations were made, the import of which was a unanimousopinion that there was something sinister about the room."Is it not so?" asked Monte Cristo. "Look at that largeclumsy bed, hung with such gloomy, blood-colored drapery!And those two crayon portraits, that have faded from thedampness; do they not seem to say, with their pale lips andstaring eyes, `We have seen'?" Villefort became livid;Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed near thechimney. "Oh," said Madame de Villefort, smiling, "are youcourageous enough to sit down upon the very seat perhapsupon which the crime was committed?" Madame Danglars rosesuddenly.

　　"And then," said Monte Cristo, "this is not all."

　　"What is there more?" said Debray, who had not failed tonotice the agitation of Madame Danglars.

　　"Ah, what else is there?" said Danglars; "for, at present, Icannot say that I have seen anything extraordinary. What doyou say, M. Cavalcanti?"

　　"Ah," said he, "we have at Pisa, Ugolino's tower; atFerrara, Tasso's prison; at Rimini, the room of Francescaand Paolo."

　　"Yes, but you have not this little staircase," said MonteCristo, opening a door concealed by the drapery. "Look atit, and tell me what you think of it."

　　"What a wicked-looking, crooked staircase," saidChateau-Renaud with a smile.

　　"I do not know whether the wine of Chios producesmelancholy, but certainly everything appears to me black inthis house," said Debray.

　　Ever since Valentine's dowry had been mentioned, Morrel hadbeen silent and sad. "Can you imagine," said Monte Cristo,"some Othello or Abbe de Ganges, one stormy, dark night,descending these stairs step by step, carrying a load, whichhe wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not from God?"Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, whowas obliged to support himself against the wall. "Ah,madame," cried Debray, "what is the matter with you? howpale you look!"

　　"It is very evident what is the matter with her," saidMadame de Villefort; "M. de Monte Cristo is relatinghorrible stories to us, doubtless intending to frighten usto death."

　　"Yes," said Villefort, "really, count, you frighten theladies."

　　"What is the matter?" asked Debray, in a whisper, of MadameDanglars.

　　"Nothing," she replied with a violent effort. "I want air,that is all."

　　"Will you come into the garden?" said Debray, advancingtowards the back staircase.

　　"No, no," she answered, "I would rather remain here."

　　"Are you really frightened, madame?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Oh, no, sir," said Madame Danglars; "but you suppose scenesin a manner which gives them the appearance of reality "

　　"Ah, yes," said Monte Cristo smiling; "it is all a matter ofimagination. Why should we not imagine this the apartment ofan honest mother? And this bed with red hangings, a bedvisited by the goddess Lucina? And that mysteriousstaircase, the passage through which, not to disturb theirsleep, the doctor and nurse pass, or even the fathercarrying the sleeping child?" Here Madame Danglars, insteadof being calmed by the soft picture, uttered a groan andfainted. "Madame Danglars is ill," said Villefort; "it wouldbe better to take her to her carriage."

　　"Oh, mon Dieu," said Monte Cristo, "and I have forgotten mysmelling-bottle!"

　　"I have mine," said Madame de Villefort; and she passed overto Monte Cristo a bottle full of the same kind of red liquidwhose good properties the count had tested on Edward.

　　"Ah," said Monte Cristo, taking it from her hand.

　　"Yes," she said, "at your advice I have made the trial."

　　"And have you succeeded?"

　　"I think so."

　　Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; MonteCristo dropped a very small portion of the red liquid uponher lips; she returned to consciousness. "Ah," she cried,"what a frightful dream!"

　　Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not adream. They looked for M. Danglars, but, as he was notespecially interested in poetical ideas, he had gone intothe garden, and was talking with Major Cavalcanti on theprojected railway from Leghorn to Florence. Monte Cristoseemed in despair. He took the arm of Madame Danglars, andconducted her into the garden, where they found Danglarstaking coffee between the Cavalcanti. "Really, madame," hesaid, "did I alarm you much?"

　　"Oh, no, sir," she answered; "but you know, things impressus differently, according to the mood of our minds."Villefort forced a laugh. "And then, you know," he said, "anidea, a supposition, is sufficient."

　　"Well," said Monte Cristo, "you may believe me if you like,but it is my opinion that a crime has been committed in thishouse."

　　"Take care," said Madame de Villefort, "the king's attorneyis here."

　　"Ah," replied Monte Cristo, "since that is the case, I willtake advantage of his presence to make my declaration."

　　"Your declaration?" said Villefort.

　　"Yes, before witnesses."

　　"Oh, this is very interesting," said Debray; "if therereally has been a crime, we will investigate it."

　　"There has been a crime," said Monte Cristo. "Come this way,gentlemen; come, M. Villefort, for a declaration to beavailable, should be made before the competent authorities."He then took Villefort's arm, and, at the same time, holdingthat of Madame Danglars under his own, he dragged theprocureur to the plantain-tree, where the shade wasthickest. All the other guests followed. "Stay," said MonteCristo, "here, in this very spot" (and he stamped upon theground), "I had the earth dug up and fresh mould put in, torefresh these old trees; well, my man, digging, found a box,or rather, the iron-work of a box, in the midst of which wasthe skeleton of a newly born infant." Monte Cristo felt thearm of Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of Villeforttrembled. "A newly born infant," repeated Debray; "thisaffair becomes serious!"

　　"Well," said Chateau-Renaud, "I was not wrong just now then,when I said that houses had souls and faces like men, andthat their exteriors carried the impress of theircharacters. This house was gloomy because it was remorseful:it was remorseful because it concealed a crime."

　　"Who said it was a crime?" asked Villefort, with a lasteffort.

　　"How? is it not a crime to bury a living child in a garden?"cried Monte Cristo. "And pray what do you call such anaction?"

　　"But who said it was buried alive?"

　　"Why bury it there if it were dead? This garden has neverbeen a cemetery."

　　"What is done to infanticides in this country?" asked MajorCavalcanti innocently.

　　"Oh, their heads are soon cut off," said Danglars.

　　"Ah, indeed?" said Cavalcanti.

　　"I think so; am I not right, M. de Villefort?" asked MonteCristo.

　　"Yes, count," replied Villefort, in a voice now scarcelyhuman.

　　Monte Cristo, seeing that the two persons for whom he hadprepared this scene could scarcely endure it, and notwishing to carry it too far, said, "Come, gentlemen, -- somecoffee, we seem to have forgotten it," and he conducted theguests back to the table on the lawn.

　　"Indeed, count," said Madame Danglars, "I am ashamed to ownit, but all your frightful stories have so upset me, that Imust beg you to let me sit down;" and she fell into a chair.Monte Cristo bowed, and went to Madame de Villefort. "Ithink Madame Danglars again requires your bottle," he said.But before Madame de Villefort could reach her friend theprocureur had found time to whisper to Madame Danglars, "Imust speak to you."

　　"When?"

　　"To-morrow."

　　"Where?"

　　"In my office, or in the court, if you like, -- that is thesurest place."

　　"I will be there." -- At this moment Madame de Villefortapproached. "Thanks, my dear friend," said Madame Danglars,trying to smile; "it is over now, and I am much better."

　　Chapter 64The Beggar.

　　The evening passed on; Madame de Villefort expressed adesire to return to Paris, which Madame Danglars had notdared to do, notwithstanding the uneasiness she experienced.On his wife's request, M. de Villefort was the first to givethe signal of departure. He offered a seat in his landau toMadame Danglars, that she might be under the care of hiswife. As for M. Danglars, absorbed in an interestingconversation with M. Cavalcanti, he paid no attention toanything that was passing. While Monte Cristo had begged thesmelling-bottle of Madame de Villefort, he had noticed theapproach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, and he soonguessed all that had passed between them, though the wordshad been uttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard byMadame Danglars. Without opposing their arrangements, heallowed Morrel, Chateau-Renaud, and Debray to leave onhorseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort's carriage.Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, hadoffered him a seat in his carriage. Andrea Cavalcanti foundhis tilbury waiting at the door; the groom, in every respecta caricature of the English fashion, was standing on tiptoeto hold a large iron-gray horse.

　　Andrea had spoken very little during dinner; he was anintelligent lad, and he feared to utter some absurditybefore so many grand people, amongst whom, with dilatingeyes, he saw the king's attorney. Then he had been seizedupon by Danglars, who, with a rapid glance at thestiff-necked old major and his modest son, and taking intoconsideration the hospitality of the count, made up his mindthat he was in the society of some nabob come to Paris tofinish the worldly education of his heir. He contemplatedwith unspeakable delight the large diamond which shone onthe major's little finger; for the major, like a prudentman, in case of any accident happening to his bank-notes,had immediately converted them into an available asset.Then, after dinner, on the pretext of business, hequestioned the father and son upon their mode of living; andthe father and son, previously informed that it was throughDanglars the one was to receive his 48,000 francs and theother 50,000 livres annually, were so full of affabilitythat they would have shaken hands even with the banker'sservants, so much did their gratitude need an object toexpend itself upon. One thing above all the rest heightenedthe respect, nay almost the veneration, of Danglars forCavalcanti. The latter, faithful to the principle of Horace,nil admirari, had contented himself with showing hisknowledge by declaring in what lake the best lampreys werecaught. Then he had eaten some without saying a word more;Danglars, therefore, concluded that such luxuries werecommon at the table of the illustrious descendant of theCavalcanti, who most likely in Lucca fed upon trout broughtfrom Switzerland, and lobsters sent from England, by thesame means used by the count to bring the lampreys from LakeFusaro, and the sterlet from the Volga. Thus it was withmuch politeness of manner that he heard Cavalcanti pronouncethese words, "To-morrow, sir, I shall have the honor ofwaiting upon you on business."

　　"And I, sir," said Danglars, "shall be most happy to receiveyou." Upon which he offered to take Cavalcanti in hiscarriage to the Hotel des Princes, if it would not bedepriving him of the company of his son. To this Cavalcantireplied by saying that for some time past his son had livedindependently of him, that he had his own horses andcarriages, and that not having come together, it would notbe difficult for them to leave separately. The major seatedhimself, therefore, by the side of Danglars, who was moreand more charmed with the ideas of order and economy whichruled this man, and yet who, being able to allow his son60,000 francs a year, might be supposed to possess a fortuneof 500,000 or 600,000 livres.

　　As for Andrea, he began, by way of showing off, to scold hisgroom, who, instead of bringing the tilbury to the steps ofthe house, had taken it to the outer door, thus giving himthe trouble of walking thirty steps to reach it. The groomheard him with humility, took the bit of the impatientanimal with his left hand, and with the right held out thereins to Andrea, who, taking them from him, rested hispolished boot lightly on the step. At that moment a handtouched his shoulder. The young man turned round, thinkingthat Danglars or Monte Cristo had forgotten something theywished to tell him, and had returned just as they werestarting. But instead of either of these, he saw nothing buta strange face, sunburnt, and encircled by a beard, witheyes brilliant as carbuncles, and a smile upon the mouthwhich displayed a perfect set of white teeth, pointed andsharp as the wolf's or jackal's. A red handkerchiefencircled his gray head; torn and filthy garments coveredhis large bony limbs, which seemed as though, like those ofa skeleton, they would rattle as he walked; and the handwith which he leaned upon the young man's shoulder, andwhich was the first thing Andrea saw, seemed of giganticsize. Did the young man recognize that face by the light ofthe lantern in his tilbury, or was he merely struck with thehorrible appearance of his interrogator? We cannot say; butonly relate the fact that he shuddered and stepped backsuddenly. "What do you want of me?" he asked.

　　"Pardon me, my friend, if I disturb you," said the man withthe red handkerchief, "but I want to speak to you."

　　"You have no right to beg at night," said the groom,endeavoring to rid his master of the troublesome intruder.

　　"I am not begging, my fine fellow," said the unknown to theservant, with so ironical an expression of the eye, and sofrightful a smile, that he withdrew; "I only wish to say twoor three words to your master, who gave me a commission toexecute about a fortnight ago."

　　"Come," said Andrea, with sufficient nerve for his servantnot to perceive his agitation, "what do you want? Speakquickly, friend."

　　The man said, in a low voice: "I wish -- I wish you to spareme the walk back to Paris. I am very tired, and as I havenot eaten so good a dinner as you, I can scarcely stand."The young man shuddered at this strange familiarity. "Tellme," he said -- "tell me what you want?"

　　"Well, then, I want you to take me up in your fine carriage,and carry me back." Andrea turned pale, but said nothing.

　　"Yes," said the man, thrusting his hands into his pockets,and looking impudently at the youth; "I have taken the whiminto my head; do you understand, Master Benedetto?"

　　At this name, no doubt, the young man reflected a little,for he went towards his groom, saying, "This man is right; Idid indeed charge him with a commission, the result of whichhe must tell me; walk to the barrier, there take a cab, thatyou may not be too late." The surprised groom retired. "Letme at least reach a shady spot," said Andrea.

　　"Oh, as for that, I'll take you to a splendid place," saidthe man with the handkerchief; and taking the horse's bit heled the tilbury where it was certainly impossible for anyone to witness the honor that Andrea conferred upon him.

　　"Don't think I want the glory of riding in your finecarriage," said he; "oh, no, it's only because I am tired,and also because I have a little business to talk over withyou."

　　"Come, step in," said the young man. It was a pity thisscene had not occurred in daylight, for it was curious tosee this rascal throwing himself heavily down on the cushionbeside the young and elegant driver of the tilbury. Andreadrove past the last house in the village without saying aword to his companion, who smiled complacently, as thoughwell-pleased to find himself travelling in so comfortable avehicle. Once out of Auteuil, Andrea looked around, in orderto assure himself that he could neither be seen nor heard,and then, stopping the horse and crossing his arms beforethe man, he asked, -- "Now, tell me why you come to disturbmy tranquillity?"

　　"Let me ask you why you deceived me?"

　　"How have I deceived you?"

　　"`How,' do you ask? When we parted at the Pont du Var, youtold me you were going to travel through Piedmont andTuscany; but instead of that, you come to Paris."

　　"How does that annoy you?"

　　"It does not; on the contrary, I think it will answer mypurpose."

　　"So," said Andrea, "you are speculating upon me?"

　　"What fine words he uses!"

　　"I warn you, Master Caderousse, that you are mistaken."

　　"Well, well, don't be angry, my boy; you know well enoughwhat it is to be unfortunate; and misfortunes make usjealous. I thought you were earning a living in Tuscany orPiedmont by acting as facchino or cicerone, and I pitied yousincerely, as I would a child of my own. You know I alwaysdid call you my child."

　　"Come, come, what then?"

　　"Patience -- patience!"

　　"I am patient, but go on."

　　"All at once I see you pass through the barrier with agroom, a tilbury, and fine new clothes. You must havediscovered a mine, or else become a stockbroker."

　　"So that, as you confess, you are jealous?"

　　"No, I am pleased -- so pleased that I wished tocongratulate you; but as I am not quite properly dressed, Ichose my opportunity, that I might not compromise you."

　　"Yes, and a fine opportunity you have chosen!" exclaimedAndrea; "you speak to me before my servant."

　　"How can I help that, my boy? I speak to you when I cancatch you. You have a quick horse, a light tilbury, you arenaturally as slippery as an eel; if I had missed youto-night, I might not have had another chance."

　　"You see, I do not conceal myself."

　　"You are lucky; I wish I could say as much, for I do concealmyself; and then I was afraid you would not recognize me,but you did," added Caderousse with his unpleasant smile."It was very polite of you."

　　"Come," said Andrea, "what do want?"

　　"You do not speak affectionately to me, Benedetto, my oldfriend, that is not right -- take care, or I may becometroublesome." This menace smothered the young man's passion.He urged the horse again into a trot. "You should not speakso to an old friend like me, Caderousse, as you said justnow; you are a native of Marseilles, I am" --

　　"Do you know then now what you are?"

　　"No, but I was brought up in Corsica; you are old andobstinate, I am young and wilful. Between people like usthreats are out of place, everything should be amicablyarranged. Is it my fault if fortune, which has frowned onyou, has been kind to me?"

　　"Fortune has been kind to you, then? Your tilbury, yourgroom, your clothes, are not then hired? Good, so much thebetter," said Caderousse, his eyes sparkling with avarice.

　　"Oh, you knew that well enough before speaking to me," saidAndrea, becoming more and more excited. "If I had beenwearing a handkerchief like yours on my head, rags on myback, and worn-out shoes on my feet, you would not haveknown me."

　　"You wrong me, my boy; now I have found you, nothingprevents my being as well-dressed as any one, knowing, as Ido, the goodness of your heart. If you have two coats youwill give me one of them. I used to divide my soup and beanswith you when you were hungry."

　　"True," said Andrea.

　　"What an appetite you used to have! Is it as good now?"

　　"Oh, yes," replied Andrea, laughing.

　　"How did you come to be dining with that prince whose houseyou have just left?"

　　"He is not a prince; simply a count."

　　"A count, and a rich one too, eh?"

　　"Yes; but you had better not have anything to say to him,for he is not a very good-tempered gentleman."

　　"Oh, be easy! I have no design upon your count, and youshall have him all to yourself. But," said Caderousse, againsmiling with the disagreeable expression he had beforeassumed, "you must pay for it -- you understand?"

　　"Well, what do you want?"

　　"I think that with a hundred francs a month" --

　　"Well?"

　　"I could live" --

　　"Upon a hundred francs!"

　　"Come -- you understand me; but that with" --

　　"With?"

　　"With a hundred and fifty francs I should be quite happy."

　　"Here are two hundred," said Andrea; and he placed ten goldlouis in the hand of Caderousse.

　　"Good!" said Caderousse.

　　"Apply to the steward on the first day of every mouth, andyou will receive the same sum."

　　"There now, again you degrade me."

　　"How so?"

　　"By making me apply to the servants, when I want to transactbusiness with you alone."

　　"Well, be it so, then. Take it from me then, and so long atleast as I receive my income, you shall be paid yours."

　　"Come, come; I always said you were a line fellow, and it isa blessing when good fortune happens to such as you. Buttell me all about it?"

　　"Why do you wish to know?" asked Cavalcanti.

　　"What? do you again defy me?"

　　"No; the fact is, I have found my father."

　　"What? a real father?"

　　"Yes, so long as he pays me" --

　　"You'll honor and believe him -- that's right. What is hisname?"

　　"Major Cavalcanti."

　　"Is he pleased with you?"

　　"So far I have appeared to answer his purpose."

　　"And who found this father for you?"

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo."

　　"The man whose house you have just left?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I wish you would try and find me a situation with him asgrandfather, since he holds the money-chest!"

　　"Well, I will mention you to him. Meanwhile, what are yougoing to do?"

　　"I?"

　　"Yes, you."

　　"It is very kind of you to trouble yourself about me."

　　"Since you interest yourself in my affairs, I think it isnow my turn to ask you some questions."

　　"Ah, true. Well; I shall rent a room in some respectablehouse, wear a decent coat, shave every day, and go and readthe papers in a cafe. Then, in the evening, I shall go tothe theatre; I shall look like some retired baker. That iswhat I want."

　　"Come, if you will only put this scheme into execution, andbe steady, nothing could be better."

　　"Do you think so, M. Bossuet? And you -- what will youbecome? A peer of France?"

　　"Ah," said Andrea, "who knows?"

　　"Major Cavalcanti is already one, perhaps; but then,hereditary rank is abolished."

　　"No politics, Caderousse. And now that you have all youwant, and that we understand each other, jump down from thetilbury and disappear."

　　"Not at all, my good friend."

　　"How? Not at all?"

　　"Why, just think for a moment; with this red handkerchief onmy head, with scarcely any shoes, no papers, and ten goldnapoleons in my pocket, without reckoning what was therebefore -- making in all about two hundred francs, -- why, Ishould certainly be arrested at the barriers. Then, tojustify myself, I should say that you gave me the money;this would cause inquiries, it would be found that I leftToulon without giving due notice, and I should then beescorted back to the shores of the Mediterranean. Then Ishould become simply No. 106, and good-by to my dream ofresembling the retired baker! No, no, my boy; I preferremaining honorably in the capital." Andrea scowled.Certainly, as he had himself owned, the reputed son of MajorCavalcanti was a wilful fellow. He drew up for a minute,threw a rapid glance around him, and then his hand fellinstantly into his pocket, where it began playing with apistol. But, meanwhile, Caderousse, who had never taken hiseyes off his companion, passed his hand behind his back, andopened a long Spanish knife, which he always carried withhim, to be ready in case of need. The two friends, as wesee, were worthy of and understood one another. Andrea'shand left his pocket inoffensively, and was carried up tothe red mustache, which it played with for some time. "GoodCaderousse," he said, "how happy you will be."

　　"I will do my best," said the inn-keeper of the Pont duGard, shutting up his knife.

　　"Well, then, we will go into Paris. But how will you passthrough the barrier without exciting suspicion? It seems tome that you are in more danger riding than on foot."

　　"Wait," said Caderousse, "we shall see." He then took thegreat-coat with the large collar, which the groom had leftbehind in the tilbury, and put it on his back; then he tookoff Cavalcanti's hat, which he placed upon his own head, andfinally he assumed the careless attitude of a servant whosemaster drives himself.

　　"But, tell me," said Andrea, "am I to remain bareheaded?"

　　"Pooh," said Caderousse; "it is so windy that your hat caneasily appear to have blown off."

　　"Come, come; enough of this," said Cavalcanti.

　　"What are you waiting for?" said Caderousse. "I hope I amnot the cause."

　　"Hush," said Andrea. They passed the barrier withoutaccident. At the first cross street Andrea stopped hishorse, and Caderousse leaped out.

　　"Well!" said Andrea, -- "my servant's coat and my hat?"

　　"Ah," said Caderousse, "you would not like me to risk takingcold?"

　　"But what am I to do?"

　　"You? Oh, you are young while I am beginning to get old. Aurevoir, Benedetto;" and running into a court, hedisappeared. "Alas," said Andrea, sighing, "one cannot becompletely happy in this world!"

　　Chapter 65A Conjugal Scene.

　　At the Place Louis XV. the three young people separated --that is to say, Morrel went to the Boulevards,Chateau-Renaud to the Pont de la Revolution, and Debray tothe Quai. Most probably Morrel and Chateau-Renaud returnedto their "domestic hearths," as they say in the gallery ofthe Chamber in well-turned speeches, and in the theatre ofthe Rue Richelieu in well-written pieces; but it was not thecase with Debray. When he reached the wicket of the Louvre,he turned to the left, galloped across the Carrousel, passedthrough the Rue Saint-Roch, and, issuing from the Rue de laMichodiere, he arrived at M. Danglars' door just at the sametime that Villefort's landau, after having deposited him andhis wife at the Faubourg St. Honore, stopped to leave thebaroness at her own house. Debray, with the air of a manfamiliar with the house, entered first into the court, threwhis bridle into the hands of a footman, and returned to thedoor to receive Madame Danglars, to whom he offered his arm,to conduct her to her apartments. The gate once closed, andDebray and the baroness alone in the court, he asked, --"What was the matter with you, Hermine? and why were you soaffected at that story, or rather fable, which the countrelated?"

　　"Because I have been in such shocking spirits all theevening, my friend," said the baroness.

　　"No, Hermine," replied Debray; "you cannot make me believethat; on the contrary, you were in excellent spirits whenyou arrived at the count's. M. Danglars was disagreeable,certainly, but I know how much you care for his ill-humor.Some one has vexed you; I will allow no one to annoy you."

　　"You are deceived, Lucien, I assure you," replied MadameDanglars; "and what I have told you is really the case,added to the ill-humor you remarked, but which I did notthink it worth while to allude to." It was evident thatMadame Danglars was suffering from that nervous irritabilitywhich women frequently cannot account for even tothemselves; or that, as Debray had guessed, she hadexperienced some secret agitation that she would notacknowledge to any one. Being a man who knew that the formerof these symptoms was one of the inherent penalties ofwomanhood, he did not then press his inquiries, but waitedfor a more appropriate opportunity when he should againinterrogate her, or receive an avowal proprio motu. At thedoor of her apartment the baroness met MademoiselleCornelie, her confidential maid. "What is my daughterdoing?" asked Madame Danglars.

　　"She practiced all the evening, and then went to bed,"replied Mademoiselle Cornelie.

　　"Yet I think I hear her piano."

　　"It is Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, who is playing whileMademoiselle Danglars is in bed."

　　"Well," said Madame Danglars, "come and undress me." Theyentered the bedroom. Debray stretched himself upon a largecouch, and Madame Danglars passed into her dressing-roomwith Mademoiselle Cornelie. "My dear M. Lucien," said MadameDanglars through the door, "you are always complaining thatEugenie will not address a word to you."

　　"Madame," said Lucien, playing with a little dog, who,recognizing him as a friend of the house, expected to becaressed, "I am not the only one who makes similarcomplaints, I think I heard Morcerf say that he could notextract a word from his betrothed."

　　"True," said Madame Danglars; "yet I think this will allpass off, and that you will one day see her enter yourstudy."

　　"My study?"

　　"At least that of the minister."

　　"Why so!"

　　"To ask for an engagement at the Opera. Really, I never sawsuch an infatuation for music; it is quite ridiculous for ayoung lady of fashion." Debray smiled. "Well," said he, "lether come, with your consent and that of the baron, and wewill try and give her an engagement, though we are very poorto pay such talent as hers."

　　"Go, Cornelie," said Madame Danglars, "I do not require youany longer."

　　Cornelie obeyed, and the next minute Madame Danglars lefther room in a charming loose dress, and came and sat downclose to Debray. Then she began thoughtfully to caress thelittle spaniel. Lucien looked at her for a moment insilence. "Come, Hermine," he said, after a short time,"answer candidly, -- something vexes you -- is it not so?"

　　"Nothing," answered the baroness.

　　And yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and wenttowards a looking-glass. "I am frightful to-night," shesaid. Debray rose, smiling, and was about to contradict thebaroness upon this latter point, when the door openedsuddenly. M. Danglars appeared; Debray reseated himself. Atthe noise of the door Madame Danglars turned round, andlooked upon her husband with an astonishment she took notrouble to conceal. "Good-evening, madame," said the banker;"good-evening, M. Debray."

　　Probably the baroness thought this unexpected visitsignified a desire to make up for the sharp words he haduttered during the day. Assuming a dignified air, she turnedround to Debray, without answering her husband. "Read mesomething, M. Debray," she said. Debray, who was slightlydisturbed at this visit, recovered himself when he saw thecalmness of the baroness, and took up a book marked by amother-of-pearl knife inlaid with gold. "Excuse me," saidthe banker, "but you will tire yourself, baroness, by suchlate hours, and M. Debray lives some distance from here."

　　Debray was petrified, not only to hear Danglars speak socalmly and politely, but because it was apparent thatbeneath outward politeness there really lurked a determinedspirit of opposition to anything his wife might wish to do.The baroness was also surprised, and showed her astonishmentby a look which would doubtless have had some effect uponher husband if he had not been intently occupied with thepaper, where he was looking to see the closing stockquotations. The result was, that the proud look entirelyfailed of its purpose.

　　"M. Lucien," said the baroness, "I assure you I have nodesire to sleep, and that I have a thousand things to tellyou this evening, which you must listen to, even though youslept while hearing me."

　　"I am at your service, madame," replied Lucien coldly.

　　"My dear M. Debray," said the banker, "do not kill yourselfto-night listening to the follies of Madame Danglars, foryou can hear them as well to-morrow; but I claim to-nightand will devote it, if you will allow me, to talk over someserious matters with my wife." This time the blow was sowell aimed, and hit so directly, that Lucien and thebaroness were staggered, and they interrogated each otherwith their eyes, as if to seek help against this aggression,but the irresistible will of the master of the houseprevailed, and the husband was victorious.

　　"Do not think I wish to turn you out, my dear Debray,"continued Danglars; "oh, no, not at all. An unexpectedoccurrence forces me to ask my wife to have a littleconversation with me; it is so rarely I make such a request,I am sure you cannot grudge it to me." Debray mutteredsomething, bowed and went out, knocking himself against theedge of the door, like Nathan in "Athalie."

　　"It is extraordinary," he said, when the door was closedbehind him, "how easily these husbands, whom we ridicule,gain an advantage over us."

　　Lucien having left, Danglars took his place on the sofa,closed the open book, and placing himself in a dreadfullydictatorial attitude, he began playing with the dog; but theanimal, not liking him as well as Debray, and attempting tobite him, Danglars seized him by the skin of his neck andthrew him upon a couch on the other side of the room. Theanimal uttered a cry during the transit, but, arrived at itsdestination, it crouched behind the cushions, and stupefiedat such unusual treatment remained silent and motionless."Do you know, sir," asked the baroness, "that you areimproving? Generally you are only rude, but to-night you arebrutal."

　　"It is because I am in a worse humor than usual," repliedDanglars. Hermine looked at the banker with supreme disdain.These glances frequently exasperated the pride of Danglars,but this evening he took no notice of them.

　　"And what have I to do with your ill-humor?" said thebaroness, irritated at the impassibility of her husband; "dothese things concern me? Keep your ill-humor at home in yourmoney boxes, or, since you have clerks whom you pay, vent itupon them."

　　"Not so," replied Danglars; "your advice is wrong, so Ishall not follow it. My money boxes are my Pactolus, as, Ithink, M. Demoustier says, and I will not retard its course,or disturb its calm. My clerks are honest men, who earn myfortune, whom I pay much below their deserts, if I may valuethem according to what they bring in; therefore I shall notget into a passion with them; those with whom I will be in apassion are those who eat my dinners, mount my horses, andexhaust my fortune."

　　"And pray who are the persons who exhaust your fortune?Explain yourself more clearly, I beg, sir."

　　"Oh, make yourself easy! -- I am not speaking riddles, andyou will soon know what I mean. The people who exhaust myfortune are those who draw out 700,000 francs in the courseof an hour."

　　"I do not understand you, sir," said the baroness, trying todisguise the agitation of her voice and the flush of herface. "You understand me perfectly, on the contrary," saidDanglars: "but, if you will persist, I will tell you that Ihave just lost 700,000 francs upon the Spanish loan."

　　"And pray," asked the baroness, "am I responsible for thisloss?"

　　"Why not?"

　　"Is it my fault you have lost 700,000 francs?"

　　"Certainly it is not mine."

　　"Once for all, sir," replied the baroness sharply, "I tellyou I will not hear cash named; it is a style of language Inever heard in the house of my parents or in that of myfirst husband."

　　"Oh, I can well believe that, for neither of them was wortha penny."

　　"The better reason for my not being conversant with theslang of the bank, which is here dinning in my ears frommorning to night; that noise of jingling crowns, which areconstantly being counted and re-counted, is odious to me. Ionly know one thing I dislike more, which is the sound ofyour voice."

　　"Really?" said Danglars. "Well, this surprises me, for Ithought you took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!"

　　"I? What could put such an idea into your head?"

　　"Yourself."

　　"Ah? -- what next?"

　　"Most assuredly."

　　"I should like to know upon what occasion?"

　　"Oh, mon Dieu, that is very easily done. Last February youwere the first who told me of the Haitian funds. You haddreamed that a ship had entered the harbor at Havre, thatthis ship brought news that a payment we had looked upon aslost was going to be made. I know how clear-sighted yourdreams are; I therefore purchased immediately as many sharesas I could of the Haitian debt, and I gained 400,000 francsby it, of which 100,000 have been honestly paid to you. Youspent it as you pleased; that was your business. In Marchthere was a question about a grant to a railway. Threecompanies presented themselves, each offering equalsecurities. You told me that your instinct, -- and althoughyou pretend to know nothing about speculations, I think onthe contrary, that your comprehension is very clear uponcertain affairs, -- well, you told me that your instinct ledyou to believe the grant would be given to the companycalled the Southern. I bought two thirds of the shares ofthat company; as you had foreseen, the shares trebled invalue, and I picked up a million, from which 250,000 francswere paid to you for pin-money. How have you spent this250,000 francs? -- it is no business of mine."

　　"When are you coming to the point?" cried the baroness,shivering with anger and impatience.

　　"Patience, madame, I am coming to it."

　　"That's fortunate."

　　"In April you went to dine at the minister's. You heard aprivate conversation respecting Spanish affairs -- on theexpulsion of Don Carlos. I bought some Spanish shares. Theexpulsion took place and I pocketed 600,000 francs the dayCharles V. repassed the Bidassoa. Of these 600,000 francsyou took 50,000 crowns. They were yours, you disposed ofthem according to your fancy, and I asked no questions; butit is not the less true that you have this year received500,000 livres."

　　"Well, sir, and what then?"

　　"Ah, yes, it was just after this that you spoiledeverything."

　　"Really, your manner of speaking" --

　　"It expresses my meaning, and that is all I want. Well,three days after that you talked politics with M. Debray,and you fancied from his words that Don Carlos had returnedto Spain. Well, I sold my shares, the news got out, and I nolonger sold -- I gave them away, next day I find the newswas false, and by this false report I have lost 700,000francs."

　　"Well?"

　　"Well, since I gave you a fourth of my gains, I think youowe me a fourth of my losses; the fourth of 700,000 francsis 175,000 francs."

　　"What you say is absurd, and I cannot see why M. Debray'sname is mixed up in this affair."

　　"Because if you do not possess the 175,000 francs I reclaim,you must have lent them to your friends, and M. Debray isone of your friends."

　　"For shame!" exclaimed the baroness.

　　"Oh, let us have no gestures, no screams, no modern drama,or you will oblige me to tell you that I see Debray leavehere, pocketing the whole of the 500,000 livres you havehanded over to him this year, while he smiles to himself,saying that he has found what the most skilful players havenever discovered -- that is, a roulette where he winswithout playing, and is no loser when he loses." Thebaroness became enraged. "Wretch!" she cried, "will you dareto tell me you did not know what you now reproach me with?"

　　"I do not say that I did know it, and I do not say that Idid not know it. I merely tell you to look into my conductduring the last four years that we have ceased to be husbandand wife, and see whether it has not always been consistent.Some time after our rupture, you wished to study music,under the celebrated baritone who made such a successfulappearance at the Theatre Italien; at the same time I feltinclined to learn dancing of the danseuse who acquired sucha reputation in London. This cost me, on your account andmine, 100,000 francs. I said nothing, for we must have peacein the house; and 100,000 francs for a lady and gentleman tobe properly instructed in music and dancing are not toomuch. Well, you soon become tired of singing, and you take afancy to study diplomacy with the minister's secretary. Youunderstand, it signifies nothing to me so long as you payfor your lessons out of your own cashbox. But to-day I findyou are drawing on mine, and that your apprenticeship maycost me 700,000 francs per month. Stop there, madame, forthis cannot last. Either the diplomatist must give hislessons gratis, and I will tolerate him, or he must neverset his foot again in my house; -- do you understand,madame?"

　　"Oh, this is too much," cried Hermine, choking, "you areworse than despicable."

　　"But," continued Danglars, "I find you did not even pausethere" --

　　"Insults!"

　　"You are right; let us leave these facts alone, and reasoncoolly. I have never interfered in your affairs exceptingfor your good; treat me in the same way. You say you havenothing to do with my cash-box. Be it so. Do as you likewith your own, but do not fill or empty mine. Besides, howdo I know that this was not a political trick, that theminister enraged at seeing me in the opposition, and jealousof the popular sympathy I excite, has not concerted with M.Debray to ruin me?"

　　"A probable thing!"

　　"Why not? Who ever heard of such an occurrence as this? -- afalse telegraphic despatch -- it is almost impossible forwrong signals to be made as they were in the last twotelegrams. It was done on purpose for me -- I am sure ofit."

　　"Sir," said the baroness humbly, "are you not aware that theman employed there was dismissed, that they talked of goingto law with him, that orders were issued to arrest him andthat this order would have been put into execution if he hadnot escaped by flight, which proves that he was either mador guilty? It was a mistake."

　　"Yes, which made fools laugh, which caused the minister tohave a sleepless night, which has caused the minister'ssecretaries to blacken several sheets of paper, but whichhas cost me 700,000 francs."

　　"But, sir," said Hermine suddenly, "if all this is, as yousay, caused by M. Debray, why, instead of going direct tohim, do you come and tell me of it? Why, to accuse the man,do you address the woman?"

　　"Do I know M. Debray? -- do I wish to know him? -- do I wishto know that he gives advice? -- do I wish to follow it? --do I speculate? No; you do all this, not I."

　　"Still it seems to me, that as you profit by it -- "

　　Danglars shrugged his shoulders. "Foolish creature," heexclaimed. "Women fancy they have talent because they havemanaged two or three intrigues without being the talk ofParis! But know that if you had even hidden yourirregularities from your husband, who has but thecommencement of the art -- for generally husbands will notsee -- you would then have been but a faint imitation ofmost of your friends among the women of the world. But ithas not been so with me, -- I see, and always have seen,during the last sixteen years. You may, perhaps, have hiddena thought; but not a step, not an action, not a fault, hasescaped me, while you flattered yourself upon your address,and firmly believed you had deceived me. What has been theresult? -- that, thanks to my pretended ignorance, there isnone of your friends, from M. de Villefort to M. Debray, whohas not trembled before me. There is not one who has nottreated me as the master of the house, -- the only title Idesire with respect to you; there is not one, in fact, whowould have dared to speak of me as I have spoken of themthis day. I will allow you to make me hateful, but I willprevent your rendering me ridiculous, and, above all, Iforbid you to ruin me."

　　The baroness had been tolerably composed until the name ofVillefort had been pronounced; but then she became pale,and, rising, as if touched by a spring, she stretched outher hands as though conjuring an apparition; she then tooktwo or three steps towards her husband, as though to tearthe secret from him, of which he was ignorant, or which hewithheld from some odious calculation, -- odious, as all hiscalculations were. "M. de Villefort! -- What do you mean?"

　　"I mean that M. de Nargonne, your first husband, beingneither a philosopher nor a banker, or perhaps being both,and seeing there was nothing to be got out of a king'sattorney, died of grief or anger at finding, after anabsence of nine months, that you had been enceinte six. I ambrutal, -- I not only allow it, but boast of it; it is oneof the reasons of my success in commercial business. Why didhe kill himself instead of you? Because he had no cash tosave. My life belongs to my cash. M. Debray has made me lose700,000 francs; let him bear his share of the loss, and wewill go on as before; if not, let him become bankrupt forthe 250,000 livres, and do as all bankrupts do -- disappear.He is a charming fellow, I allow, when his news is correct;but when it is not, there are fifty others in the world whowould do better than he."

　　Madame Danglars was rooted to the spot; she made a violenteffort to reply to this last attack, but she fell upon achair thinking of Villefort, of the dinner scene, of thestrange series of misfortunes which had taken place in herhouse during the last few days, and changed the usual calmof her establishment to a scene of scandalous debate.Danglars did not even look at her, though she did her bestto faint. He shut the bedroom door after him, without addinganother word, and returned to his apartments; and whenMadame Danglars recovered from her half-fainting condition,she could almost believe that she had had a disagreeabledream.

　　Chapter 66Matrimonial Projects.

　　The day following this scene, at the hour the banker usuallychose to pay a visit to Madame Danglars on his way to hisoffice, his coupe did not appear. At this time, that is,about half-past twelve, Madame Danglars ordered hercarriage, and went out. Danglars, hidden behind a curtain,watched the departure he had been waiting for. He gaveorders that he should be informed as soon as Madame Danglarsappeared; but at two o'clock she had not returned. He thencalled for his horses, drove to the Chamber, and inscribedhis name to speak against the budget. From twelve to twoo'clock Danglars had remained in his study, unsealing hisdispatches, and becoming more and more sad every minute,heaping figure upon figure, and receiving, among othervisits, one from Major Cavalcanti, who, as stiff and exactas ever, presented himself precisely at the hour named thenight before, to terminate his business with the banker. Onleaving the Chamber, Danglars, who had shown violent marksof agitation during the sitting, and been more bitter thanever against the ministry, re-entered his carriage, and toldthe coachman to drive to the Avenue des Champs-Elysees, No.30.

　　Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with some oneand begged Danglars to wait for a moment in thedrawing-room. While the banker was waiting in the anteroom,the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbe and doubtlessmore familiar with the house than he was, came in andinstead of waiting, merely bowed, passed on to the fartherapartments, and disappeared. A minute after the door bywhich the priest had entered reopened, and Monte Cristoappeared. "Pardon me," said he, "my dear baron, but one ofmy friends, the Abbe Busoni, whom you perhaps saw pass by,has just arrived in Paris; not having seen him for a longtime, I could not make up my mind to leave him sooner, so Ihope this will be sufficient reason for my having made youwait."

　　"Nay," said Danglars, "it is my fault; I have chosen myvisit at a wrong time, and will retire."

　　"Not at all; on the contrary, be seated; but what is thematter with you? You look careworn; really, you alarm me.Melancholy in a capitalist, like the appearance of a comet,presages some misfortune to the world."

　　"I have been in ill-luck for several days," said Danglars,"and I have heard nothing but bad news."

　　"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo. "Have you had another fallat the Bourse?"

　　"No; I am safe for a few days at least. I am only annoyedabout a bankrupt of Trieste."

　　"Really? Does it happen to be Jacopo Manfredi?"

　　"Exactly so. Imagine a man who has transacted business withme for I don't know how long, to the amount of 800,000 or900,000 francs during the year. Never a mistake or delay --a fellow who paid like a prince. Well, I was a million inadvance with him, and now my fine Jacopo Manfredi suspendspayment!"

　　"Really?"

　　"It is an unheard-of fatality. I draw upon him for 600,000francs, my bills are returned unpaid, and, more than that, Ihold bills of exchange signed by him to the value of 400,000francs, payable at his correspondent's in Paris at the endof this month. To-day is the 30th. I present them; but mycorrespondent has disappeared. This, with my Spanishaffairs, made a pretty end to the month."

　　"Then you really lost by that affair in Spain?"

　　"Yes; only 700,000 francs out of my cash-box -- nothingmore!"

　　"Why, how could you make such a mistake -- such an oldstager?"

　　"Oh, it is all my wife's fault. She dreamed Don Carlos hadreturned to Spain; she believes in dreams. It is magnetism,she says, and when she dreams a thing it is sure to happen,she assures me. On this conviction I allow her to speculate,she having her bank and her stockbroker; she speculated andlost. It is true she speculates with her own money, notmine; nevertheless, you can understand that when 700,000francs leave the wife's pocket, the husband always finds itout. But do you mean to say you have not heard of this? Why,the thing has made a tremendous noise."

　　"Yes, I heard it spoken of, but I did not know the details,and then no one can be more ignorant than I am of theaffairs in the Bourse."

　　"Then you do not speculate?"

　　"I? -- How could I speculate when I already have so muchtrouble in regulating my income? I should be obliged,besides my steward, to keep a clerk and a boy. But touchingthese Spanish affairs, I think that the baroness did notdream the whole of the Don Carlos matter. The papers saidsomething about it, did they not?"

　　"Then you believe the papers?"

　　"I? -- not the least in the world; only I fancied that thehonest Messager was an exception to the rule, and that itonly announced telegraphic despatches."

　　"Well, that's what puzzles me," replied Danglars; "the newsof the return of Don Carlos was brought by telegraph."

　　"So that," said Monte Cristo, "you have lost nearly1,700,000 francs this month."

　　"Not nearly, indeed; that is exactly my loss."

　　"Diable," said Monte Cristo compassionately, "it is a hardblow for a third-rate fortune."

　　"Third-rate," said Danglars, rather humble, "what do youmean by that?"

　　"Certainly," continued Monte Cristo, "I make threeassortments in fortune -- first-rate, second-rate, andthird-rate fortunes. I call those first-rate which arecomposed of treasures one possesses under one's hand, suchas mines, lands, and funded property, in such states asFrance, Austria, and England, provided these treasures andproperty form a total of about a hundred millions; I callthose second-rate fortunes, that are gained by manufacturingenterprises, joint-stock companies, viceroyalties, andprincipalities, not drawing more than 1,500,000 francs, thewhole forming a capital of about fifty millions; finally, Icall those third-rate fortunes, which are composed of afluctuating capital, dependent upon the will of others, orupon chances which a bankruptcy involves or a false telegramshakes, such as banks, speculations of the day -- in fact,all operations under the influence of greater or lessmischances, the whole bringing in a real or fictitiouscapital of about fifteen millions. I think this is aboutyour position, is it not?"

　　"Confound it, yes!" replied Danglars.

　　"The result, then, of six more such months as this would beto reduce the third-rate house to despair."

　　"Oh," said Danglars, becoming very pale, how you are runningon!"

　　"Let us imagine seven such months," continued Monte Cristo,in the same tone. "Tell me, have you ever thought that seventimes 1,700,000 francs make nearly twelve millions? No, youhave not; -- well, you are right, for if you indulged insuch reflections, you would never risk your principal, whichis to the speculator what the skin is to civilized man. Wehave our clothes, some more splendid than others, -- this isour credit; but when a man dies he has only his skin; in thesame way, on retiring from business, you have nothing butyour real principal of about five or six millions, at themost; for third-rate fortunes are never more than a fourthof what they appear to be, like the locomotive on a railway,the size of which is magnified by the smoke and steamsurrounding it. Well, out of the five or six millions whichform your real capital, you have just lost nearly twomillions, which must, of course, in the same degree diminishyour credit and fictitious fortune; to follow out my simile,your skin has been opened by bleeding, and this if repeatedthree or four times will cause death -- so pay attention toit, my dear Monsieur Danglars. Do you want money? Do youwish me to lend you some?"

　　"What a bad calculator you are!" exclaimed Danglars, callingto his assistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. "Ihave made money at the same time by speculations which havesucceeded. I have made up the loss of blood by nutrition. Ilost a battle in Spain, I have been defeated in Trieste, butmy naval army in India will have taken some galleons, and myMexican pioneers will have discovered some mine."

　　"Very good, very good! But the wound remains and will reopenat the first loss."

　　"No, for I am only embarked in certainties," repliedDanglars, with the air of a mountebank sounding his ownpraises; "to involve me, three governments must crumble todust."

　　"Well, such things have been."

　　"That there should be a famine!"

　　"Recollect the seven fat and the seven lean kine."

　　"Or, that the sea should become dry, as in the days ofPharaoh, and even then my vessels would become caravans."

　　"So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M.Danglars," said Monte Cristo; "I see I was deceived, andthat you belong to the class of second-rate fortunes."

　　"I think I may aspire to that honor," said Danglars with asmile, which reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons whichbad artists are so fond of daubing into their pictures ofruins. "But, while we are speaking of business," Danglarsadded, pleased to find an opportunity of changing thesubject, "tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti."

　　"Give him money, if he is recommended to you, and therecommendation seems good."

　　"Excellent; he presented himself this morning with a bond of40,000 francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by Busoni,and returned by you to me, with your indorsement -- ofcourse, I immediately counted him over the fortybank-notes."

　　Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent. "But thatis not all," continued Danglars; "he has opened an accountwith my house for his son."

　　"May I ask how much he allows the young man?"

　　"Five thousand francs per month."

　　"Sixty thousand francs per year. I thought I was right inbelieving that Cavalcanti to be a stingy fellow. How can ayoung man live upon 5,000 francs a month?"

　　"But you understand that if the young man should want a fewthousands more" --

　　"Do not advance it; the father will never repay it. You donot know these ultramontane millionaires; they are regularmisers. And by whom were they recommended to you?"

　　"Oh, by the house of Fenzi, one of the best in Florence."

　　"I do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mindyou hold to the terms of the agreement."

　　"Would you not trust the Cavalcanti?"

　　"I? oh, I would advance six millions on his signature. I wasonly speaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes wewere mentioning just now."

　　"And with all this, how unassuming he is! I should neverhave taken him for anything more than a mere major."

　　"And you would have flattered him, for certainly, as yousay, he has no manner. The first time I saw him he appearedto me like an old lieutenant who had grown mouldy under hisepaulets. But all the Italians are the same; they are likeold Jews when they are not glittering in Oriental splendor."

　　"The young man is better," said Danglars.

　　"Yes; a little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, heappeared tolerable. I was uneasy about him."

　　"Why?"

　　"Because you met him at my house, just after hisintroduction into the world, as they told me. He has beentravelling with a very severe tutor, and had never been toParis before."

　　"Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do theynot?" asked Danglars carelessly; they like to unite theirfortunes."

　　"It is usual, certainly; but Cavalcanti is an original whodoes nothing like other people. I cannot help thinking thathe has brought his son to France to choose a wife."

　　"Do you think so?"

　　"I am sure of it."

　　"And you have heard his fortune mentioned?"

　　"Nothing else was talked of; only some said he was worthmillions, and others that he did not possess a farthing."

　　"And what is your opinion?"

　　"I ought not to influence you, because it is only my ownpersonal impression."

　　"Well, and it is that" --

　　"My opinion is, that all these old podestas, these ancientcondottieri, -- for the Cavalcanti have commanded armies andgoverned provinces, -- my opinion, I say, is, that they haveburied their millions in corners, the secret of which theyhave transmitted only to their eldest sons, who have donethe same from generation to generation; and the proof ofthis is seen in their yellow and dry appearance, like theflorins of the republic, which, from being constantly gazedupon, have become reflected in them."

　　"Certainly," said Danglars, "and this is further supportedby the fact of their not possessing an inch of land."

　　"Very little, at least; I know of none which Cavalcantipossesses, excepting his palace in Lucca."

　　"Ah, he has a palace?" said Danglars, laughing; "come, thatis something."

　　"Yes; and more than that, he lets it to the Minister ofFinance while he lives in a simple house. Oh, as I told youbefore, I think the old fellow is very close."

　　"Come, you do not flatter him."

　　"I scarcely know him; I think I have seen him three times inmy life; all I know relating to him is through Busoni andhimself. He was telling me this morning that, tired ofletting his property lie dormant in Italy, which is a deadnation, he wished to find a method, either in France orEngland, of multiplying his millions, but remember, thatthough I place great confidence in Busoni, I am notresponsible for this."

　　"Never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sentme. It is a fine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and mycashier was quite proud of it when I explained to him whothe Cavalcanti were. By the way, this is merely a simplequestion, when this sort of people marry their sons, do theygive them any fortune?"

　　"Oh, that depends upon circumstances. I know an Italianprince, rich as a gold mine, one of the noblest families inTuscany, who, when his sons married according to his wish,gave them millions; and when they married against hisconsent, merely allowed them thirty crowns a month. ShouldAndrea marry according to his father's views, he will,perhaps, give him one, two, or three millions. For example,supposing it were the daughter of a banker, he might take aninterest in the house of the father-in-law of his son; thenagain, if he disliked his choice, the major takes the key,double-locks his coffer, and Master Andrea would be obligedto live like the sons of a Parisian family, by shufflingcards or rattling the dice."

　　"Ah, that boy will find out some Bavarian or Peruvianprincess; he will want a crown and an immense fortune."

　　"No; these grand lords on the other side of the Alpsfrequently marry into plain families; like Jupiter, theylike to cross the race. But do you wish to marry Andrea, mydear M. Danglars, that you are asking so many questions?"

　　"Ma foi," said Danglars, "it would not be a bad speculation,I fancy, and you know I am a speculator."

　　"You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; youwould not like poor Andrea to have his throat cut byAlbert?"

　　"Albert," repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; "ah,well; he would care very little about it, I think."

　　"But he is betrothed to your daughter, I believe?"

　　"Well, M. de Morcerf and I have talked about this marriage,but Madame de Morcerf and Albert" --

　　"You do not mean to say that it would not be a good match?"

　　"Indeed, I imagine that Mademoiselle Danglars is as good asM. de Morcerf."

　　"Mademoiselle Danglars' fortune will be great, no doubt,especially it the telegraph should not make any moremistakes."

　　"Oh, I do not mean her fortune only; but tell me" --

　　"What?"

　　"Why did you not invite M. and Madame de Morcerf to yourdinner?"

　　"I did so, but he excused himself on account of Madame deMorcerf being obliged to go to Dieppe for the benefit of seaair."

　　"Yes, yes," said Danglars, laughing, "it would do her agreat deal of good."

　　"Why so?"

　　"Because it is the air she always breathed in her youth."Monte Cristo took no notice of this ill-natured remark.

　　"But still, if Albert be not so rich as MademoiselleDanglars," said the count, "you must allow that he has afine name?"

　　"So he has; but I like mine as well."

　　"Certainly; your name is popular, and does honor to thetitle they have adorned it with; but you are too intelligentnot to know that according to a prejudice, too firmly rootedto be exterminated, a nobility which dates back fivecenturies is worth more than one that can only reckon twentyyears."

　　"And for this very reason," said Danglars with a smile,which he tried to make sardonic, "I prefer M. AndreaCavalcanti to M. Albert de Morcerf."

　　"Still, I should not think the Morcerfs would yield to theCavalcanti?"

　　"The Morcerfs! -- Stay, my dear count," said Danglars; "youare a man of the world, are you not?"

　　"I think so."

　　"And you understand heraldry?"

　　"A little."

　　"Well, look at my coat-of-arms, it is worth more thanMorcerf's."

　　"Why so?"

　　"Because, though I am not a baron by birth, my real name is,at least, Danglars."

　　"Well, what then?"

　　"While his name is not Morcerf."

　　"How? -- not Morcerf?"

　　"Not the least in the world."

　　"Go on."

　　"I have been made a baron, so that I actually am one; hemade himself a count, so that he is not one at all."

　　"Impossible!"

　　"Listen my dear count; M. de Morcerf has been my friend, orrather my acquaintance, during the last thirty years. Youknow I have made the most of my arms, though I never forgotmy origin."

　　"A proof of great humility or great pride," said MonteCristo.

　　"Well, when I was a clerk, Morcerf was a mere fisherman."

　　"And then he was called" --

　　"Fernand."

　　"Only Fernand?"

　　"Fernand Mondego."

　　"You are sure?"

　　"Pardieu, I have bought enough fish of him to know hisname."

　　"Then, why did you think of giving your daughter to him?"

　　"Because Fernand and Danglars, being both parvenus, bothhaving become noble, both rich, are about equal in worth,excepting that there have been certain things mentioned ofhim that were never said of me."

　　"What?"

　　"Oh, nothing!"

　　"Ah, yes; what you tell me recalls to mind something aboutthe name of Fernand Mondego. I have heard that name inGreece."

　　"In conjunction with the affairs of Ali Pasha?"

　　"Exactly so."

　　"This is the mystery," said Danglars. "I acknowledge I wouldhave given anything to find it out."

　　"It would be very easy if you much wished it?"

　　"How so?"

　　"Probably you have some correspondent in Greece?"

　　"I should think so."

　　"At Yanina?"

　　"Everywhere."

　　"Well, write to your correspondent in Yanina, and ask himwhat part was played by a Frenchman named Fernand Mondego inthe catastrophe of Ali Tepelini."

　　"You are right," exclaimed Danglars, rising quickly, "I willwrite to-day."

　　"Do so."

　　"I will."

　　"And if you should hear of anything very scandalous" --

　　"I will communicate it to you."

　　"You will oblige me." Danglars rushed out of the room, andmade but one leap into his coupe.

　　Chapter 67At the Office of the King's Attorney.

　　Let us leave the banker driving his horses at their fullestspeed, and follow Madame Danglars in her morning excursion.We have said that at half-past twelve o'clock MadameDanglars had ordered her horses, and had left home in thecarriage. She directed her course towards the Faubourg SaintGermain, went down the Rue Mazarine, and stopped at thePassage du Pont-Neuf. She descended, and went through thepassage. She was very plainly dressed, as would be the casewith a woman of taste walking in the morning. At the RueGuenegaud she called a cab, and directed the driver to go tothe Rue de Harlay. As soon as she was seated in the vehicle,she drew from her pocket a very thick black veil, which shetied on to her straw bonnet. She then replaced the bonnet,and saw with pleasure, in a little pocket-mirror, that herwhite complexion and brilliant eyes were alone visible. Thecab crossed the Pont-Neuf and entered the Rue de Harlay bythe Place Dauphine; the driver was paid as the door opened,and stepping lightly up the stairs Madame Danglars soonreached the Salle des Pas-Perdus.

　　There was a great deal going on that morning, and manybusiness-like persons at the Palais; business-like personspay very little attention to women, and Madame Danglarscrossed the hall without exciting any more attention thanany other woman calling upon her lawyer. There was a greatpress of people in M. de Villefort's ante-chamber, butMadame Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her name.The instant she appeared the door-keeper rose, came to her,and asked her whether she was not the person with whom theprocureur had made an appointment; and on her affirmativeanswer being given, he conducted her by a private passage toM. de Villefort's office. The magistrate was seated in anarm-chair, writing, with his back towards the door; he didnot move as he heard it open, and the door-keeper pronouncethe words, "Walk in, madame," and then reclose it; but nosooner had the man's footsteps ceased, than he started up,drew the bolts, closed the curtains, and examined everycorner of the room. Then, when he had assured himself thathe could neither be seen nor heard, and was consequentlyrelieved of doubts, he said, -- "Thanks, madame, -- thanksfor your punctuality; "and he offered a chair to MadameDanglars, which she accepted, for her heart beat soviolently that she felt nearly suffocated.

　　"It is a long time, madame," said the procureur, describinga half-circle with his chair, so as to place himself exactlyopposite to Madame Danglars, -- "it is a long time since Ihad the pleasure of speaking alone with you, and I regretthat we have only now met to enter upon a painfulconversation."

　　"Nevertheless, sir, you see I have answered your firstappeal, although certainly the conversation must be muchmore painful for me than for you." Villefort smiledbitterly.

　　"It is true, then," he said, rather uttering his thoughtsaloud than addressing his companion, -- "it is true, then,that all our actions leave their traces -- some sad, othersbright -- on our paths; it is true that every step in ourlives is like the course of an insect on the sands; -- itleaves its track! Alas, to many the path is traced bytears."

　　"Sir," said Madame Danglars, "you can feel for my emotion,can you not? Spare me, then, I beseech you. When I look atthis room, -- whence so many guilty creatures have departed,trembling and ashamed, when I look at that chair beforewhich I now sit trembling and ashamed, -- oh, it requiresall my reason to convince me that I am not a very guiltywoman and you a menacing judge." Villefort dropped his headand sighed. "And I," he said, "I feel that my place is notin the judge's seat, but on the prisoner's stool."

　　"You?" said Madame Danglars.

　　"Yes, I."

　　"I think, sir, you exaggerate your situation," said MadameDanglars, whose beautiful eyes sparkled for a moment. "Thepaths of which you were just speaking have been traced byall young men of ardent imaginations. Besides the pleasure,there is always remorse from the indulgence of our passions,and, after all, what have you men to fear from all this? theworld excuses, and notoriety ennobles you."

　　"Madame," replied Villefort, "you know that I am nohypocrite, or, at least, that I never deceive without areason. If my brow be severe, it is because many misfortuneshave clouded it; if my heart be petrified, it is that itmight sustain the blows it has received. I was not so in myyouth, I was not so on the night of the betrothal, when wewere all seated around a table in the Rue du Cours atMarseilles. But since then everything has changed in andabout me; I am accustomed to brave difficulties, and, in theconflict to crush those who, by their own free will, or bychance, voluntarily or involuntarily, interfere with me inmy career. It is generally the case that what we mostardently desire is as ardently withheld from us by those whowish to obtain it, or from whom we attempt to snatch it.Thus, the greater number of a man's errors come before himdisguised under the specious form of necessity; then, aftererror has been committed in a moment of excitement, ofdelirium, or of fear, we see that we might have avoided andescaped it. The means we might have used, which we in ourblindness could not see, then seem simple and easy, and wesay, `Why did I not do this, instead of that?' Women, on thecontrary, are rarely tormented with remorse; for thedecision does not come from you, -- your misfortunes aregenerally imposed upon you, and your faults the results ofothers' crimes."

　　"In any case, sir, you will allow," replied Madame Danglars,"that, even if the fault were alone mine, I last nightreceived a severe punishment for it."

　　"Poor thing," said Villefort, pressing her hand, "it was toosevere for your strength, for you were twice overwhelmed,and yet" --

　　"Well?"

　　"Well, I must tell you. Collect all your courage, for youhave not yet heard all."

　　"Ah," exclaimed Madame Danglars, alarmed, "what is theremore to hear?"

　　"You only look back to the past, and it is, indeed, badenough. Well, picture to yourself a future more gloomy still-- certainly frightful, perhaps sanguinary." The baronessknew how calm Villefort naturally was, and his presentexcitement frightened her so much that she opened her mouthto scream, but the sound died in her throat. "How has thisterrible past been recalled?" cried Villefort; "how is itthat it has escaped from the depths of the tomb and therecesses of our hearts, where it was buried, to visit usnow, like a phantom, whitening our cheeks and flushing ourbrows with shame?"

　　"Alas," said Hermine, "doubtless it is chance."

　　"Chance?" replied Villefort; "No, no, madame, there is nosuch thing as chance."

　　"Oh, yes; has not a fatal chance revealed all this? Was itnot by chance the Count of Monte Cristo bought that house?Was it not by chance he caused the earth to be dug up? Is itnot by chance that the unfortunate child was disinterredunder the trees? -- that poor innocent offspring of mine,which I never even kissed, but for whom I wept many, manytears. Ah, my heart clung to the count when he mentioned thedear spoil found beneath the flowers."

　　"Well, no, madame, -- this is the terrible news I have totell you," said Villefort in a hollow voice -- "no, nothingwas found beneath the flowers; there was no childdisinterred -- no. You must not weep, no, you must notgroan, you must tremble!"

　　"What can you mean?" asked Madame Danglars, shuddering.

　　"I mean that M. de Monte Cristo, digging underneath thesetrees, found neither skeleton nor chest, because neither ofthem was there!"

　　"Neither of them there?" repeated Madame Danglars, herstaring, wide-open eyes expressing her alarm.

　　"Neither of them there!" she again said, as though strivingto impress herself with the meaning of the words whichescaped her.

　　"No," said Villefort, burying his face in his hands, "no, ahundred times no!"

　　"Then you did not bury the poor child there, sir? Why didyou deceive me? Where did you place it? tell me -- where?"

　　"There! But listen to me -- listen -- and you will pity mewho has for twenty years alone borne the heavy burden ofgrief I am about to reveal, without casting the leastportion upon you."

　　"Oh, you frighten me! But speak; I will listen."

　　"You recollect that sad night, when you were half-expiringon that bed in the red damask room, while I, scarcely lessagitated than you, awaited your delivery. The child wasborn, was given to me -- motionless, breathless, voiceless;we thought it dead." Madame Danglars moved rapidly, asthough she would spring from her chair, but Villefortstopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore herattention. "We thought it dead," he repeated; "I placed itin the chest, which was to take the place of a coffin; Idescended to the garden, I dug a hole, and then flung itdown in haste. Scarcely had I covered it with earth, whenthe arm of the Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw ashadow rise, and, at the same time, a flash of light. I feltpain; I wished to cry out, but an icy shiver ran through myveins and stifled my voice; I fell lifeless, and fanciedmyself killed. Never shall I forget your sublime courage,when, having returned to consciousness, I dragged myself tothe foot of the stairs, and you, almost dying yourself, cameto meet me. We were obliged to keep silent upon the dreadfulcatastrophe. You had the fortitude to regain the house,assisted by your nurse. A duel was the pretext for my wound.Though we scarcely expected it, our secret remained in ourown keeping alone. I was taken to Versailles; for threemonths I struggled with death; at last, as I seemed to clingto life, I was ordered to the South. Four men carried mefrom Paris to Chalons, walking six leagues a day; Madame deVillefort followed the litter in her carriage. At Chalons Iwas put upon the Saone, thence I passed on to he Rhone,whence I descended, merely with the current, to Arles; atArles I was again placed on my litter, and continued myjourney to Marseilles. My recovery lasted six months. Inever heard you mentioned, and I did not dare inquire foryou. When I returned to Paris, I learned that you, the widowof M. de Nargonne, had married M. Danglars.

　　"What was the subject of my thoughts from the timeconsciousness returned to me? Always the same -- always thechild's corpse, coming every night in my dreams, rising fromthe earth, and hovering over the grave with menacing lookand gesture. I inquired immediately on my return to Paris;the house had not been inhabited since we left it, but ithad just been let for nine years. I found the tenant. Ipretended that I disliked the idea that a house belonging tomy wife's father and mother should pass into the hands ofstrangers. I offered to pay them for cancelling the lease;they demanded 6,000 francs. I would have given 10,000 -- Iwould have given 20,000. I had the money with me; I made thetenant sign the deed of resilition, and when I had obtainedwhat I so much wanted, I galloped to Auteuil.

　　"No one had entered the house since I had left it. It wasfive o'clock in the afternoon; I ascended into the red room,and waited for night. There all the thoughts which haddisturbed me during my year of constant agony came back withdouble force. The Corsican, who had declared the vendettaagainst me, who had followed me from Nimes to Paris, who hadhid himself in the garden, who had struck me, had seen medig the grave, had seen me inter the child, -- he mightbecome acquainted with your person, -- nay, he might eventhen have known it. Would he not one day make you pay forkeeping this terrible secret? Would it not be a sweetrevenge for him when he found that I had not died from theblow of his dagger? It was therefore necessary, beforeeverything else, and at all risks, that I should cause alltraces of the past to disappear -- that I should destroyevery material vestige; too much reality would always remainin my recollection. It was for this I had annulled the lease-- it was for this I had come -- it was for this I waswaiting. Night arrived; I allowed it to become quite dark. Iwas without a light in that room; when the wind shook allthe doors, behind which I continually expected to see somespy concealed, I trembled. I seemed everywhere to hear yourmoans behind me in the bed, and I dared not turn around. Myheart beat so violently that I feared my wound would open.At length, one by one, all the noises in the neighborhoodceased. I understood that I had nothing to fear, that Ishould neither be seen nor heard, so I decided upondescending to the garden.

　　"Listen, Hermine; I consider myself as brave as most men,but when I drew from my breast the little key of thestaircase, which I had found in my coat -- that little keywe both used to cherish so much, which you wished to havefastened to a golden ring -- when I opened the door, and sawthe pale moon shedding a long stream of white light on thespiral staircase like a spectre, I leaned against the wall,and nearly shrieked. I seemed to be going mad. At last Imastered my agitation. I descended the staircase step bystep; the only thing I could not conquer was a strangetrembling in my knees. I grasped the railings; if I hadrelaxed my hold for a moment, I should have fallen. Ireached the lower door. Outside this door a spade was placedagainst the wall; I took it, and advanced towards thethicket. I had provided myself with a dark lantern. In themiddle of the lawn I stopped to light it, then I continuedmy path.

　　"It was the end of November, all the verdure of the gardenhad disappeared, the trees were nothing more than skeletonswith their long bony arms, and the dead leaves sounded onthe gravel under my feet. My terror overcame me to such adegree as I approached the thicket, that I took a pistolfrom my pocket and armed myself. I fancied continually thatI saw the figure of the Corsican between the branches. Iexamined the thicket with my dark lantern; it was empty. Ilooked carefully around; I was indeed alone, -- no noisedisturbed the silence but the owl, whose piercing cry seemedto be calling up the phantoms of the night. I tied mylantern to a forked branch I had noticed a year before atthe precise spot where I stopped to dig the hole.

　　"The grass had grown very thickly there during the summer,and when autumn arrived no one had been there to mow it.Still one place where the grass was thin attracted myattention; it evidently was there I had turned up theground. I went to work. The hour, then, for which I had beenwaiting during the last year had at length arrived. How Iworked, how I hoped, how I struck every piece of turf,thinking to find some resistance to my spade! But no, Ifound nothing, though I had made a hole twice as large asthe first. I thought I had been deceived -- had mistaken thespot. I turned around, I looked at the trees, I tried torecall the details which had struck me at the time. A cold,sharp wind whistled through the leafless branches, and yetthe drops fell from my forehead. I recollected that I wasstabbed just as I was trampling the ground to fill up thehole; while doing so I had leaned against a laburnum; behindme was an artificial rockery, intended to serve as aresting-place for persons walking in the garden; in falling,my hand, relaxing its hold of the laburnum, felt thecoldness of the stone. On my right I saw the tree, behind methe rock. I stood in the same attitude, and threw myselfdown. I rose, and again began digging and enlarging thehole; still I found nothing, nothing -- the chest was nolonger there!"

　　"The chest no longer there?" murmured Madame Danglars,choking with fear.

　　Think not I contented myself with this one effort,"continued Villefort. "No; I searched the whole thicket. Ithought the assassin, having discovered the chest, andsupposing it to be a treasure, had intended carrying it off,but, perceiving his error, had dug another hole, anddeposited it there; but I could find nothing. Then the ideastruck me that he had not taken these precautions, and hadsimply thrown it in a corner. In the last case I must waitfor daylight to renew my search. I remained the room andwaited."

　　"Oh, heavens!"

　　When daylight dawned I went down again. My first visit wasto the thicket. I hoped to find some traces which hadescaped me in the darkness. I had turned up the earth over asurface of more than twenty feet square, and a depth of twofeet. A laborer would not have done in a day what occupiedme an hour. But I could find nothing -- absolutely nothing.Then I renewed the search. Supposing it had been thrownaside, it would probably be on the path which led to thelittle gate; but this examination was as useless as thefirst, and with a bursting heart I returned to the thicket,which now contained no hope for me."

　　"Oh," cried Madame Danglars, "it was enough to drive youmad!"

　　"I hoped for a moment that it might," said Villefort; "butthat happiness was denied me. However, recovering mystrength and my ideas, `Why,' said I, `should that man havecarried away the corpse?'"

　　"But you said," replied Madame Danglars, "he would requireit as a proof."

　　"Ah, no, madame, that could not be. Dead bodies are not kepta year; they are shown to a magistrate, and the evidence istaken. Now, nothing of the kind has happened."

　　"What then?" asked Hermine, trembling violently.

　　"Something more terrible, more fatal, more alarming for us-- the child was, perhaps, alive, and the assassin may havesaved it!"

　　Madame Danglars uttered a piercing cry, and, seizingVillefort's hands, exclaimed, "My child was alive?" saidshe; "you buried my child alive? You were not certain mychild was dead, and you buried it? Ah" --

　　Madame Danglars had risen, and stood before the procureur,whose hands she wrung in her feeble grasp. "I know not; Imerely suppose so, as I might suppose anything else,"replied Villefort with a look so fixed, it indicated thathis powerful mind was on the verge of despair and madness."Ah, my child, my poor child!" cried the baroness, fallingon her chair, and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief.Villefort, becoming somewhat reassured, perceived that toavert the maternal storm gathering over his head, he mustinspire Madame Danglars with the terror he felt. "Youunderstand, then, that if it were so," said he, rising inhis turn, and approaching the baroness, to speak to her in alower tone, "we are lost. This child lives, and some oneknows it lives -- some one is in possession of our secret;and since Monte Cristo speaks before us of a childdisinterred, when that child could not be found, it is hewho is in possession of our secret."

　　"Just God, avenging God!" murmured Madame Danglars.

　　Villefort's only answer was a stifled groan.

　　"But the child -- the child, sir?" repeated the agitatedmother.

　　"How I have searched for him," replied Villefort, wringinghis hands; "how I have called him in my long sleeplessnights; how I have longed for royal wealth to purchase amillion of secrets from a million of men, and to find mineamong them! At last, one day, when for the hundredth time Itook up my spade, I asked myself again and again what theCorsican could have done with the child. A child encumbers afugitive; perhaps, on perceiving it was still alive, he hadthrown it into the river."

　　"Impossible!" cried Madame Danglars: "a man may murderanother out of revenge, but he would not deliberately drowna child."

　　"Perhaps," continued Villefort, "he had put it in thefoundling hospital."

　　"Oh, yes, yes," cried the baroness; "my child is there!"

　　"I ran to the hospital, and learned that the same night --the night of the 20th of September -- a child had beenbrought there, wrapped in part of a fine linen napkin,purposely torn in half. This portion of the napkin wasmarked with half a baron's crown, and the letter H."

　　"Truly, truly," said Madame Danglars, "all my linen ismarked thus; Monsieur de Nargonne was a baronet, and my nameis Hermine. Thank God, my child was not then dead!"

　　"No, it was not dead."

　　"And you can tell me so without fearing to make me die ofjoy? Where is the child?" Villefort shrugged his shoulders."Do I know?" said he; "and do you believe that if I knew Iwould relate to you all its trials and all its adventures aswould a dramatist or a novel writer? Alas, no, I know not. Awoman, about six months after, came to claim it with theother half of the napkin. This woman gave all the requisiteparticulars, and it was intrusted to her."

　　"But you should have inquired for the woman; you should havetraced her."

　　"And what do you think I did? I feigned a criminal process,and employed all the most acute bloodhounds and skilfulagents in search of her. They traced her to Chalons, andthere they lost her."

　　"They lost her?"

　　"Yes, forever." Madame Danglars had listened to this recitalwith a sigh, a tear, or a shriek for every detail. "And thisis all?" said she; "and you stopped there?"

　　"Oh, no," said Villefort; "I never ceased to search and toinquire. However, the last two or three years I had allowedmyself some respite. But now I will begin with moreperseverance and fury than ever, since fear urges me, not myconscience."

　　"But," replied Madame Danglars, "the Count of Monte Cristocan know nothing, or he would not seek our society as hedoes."

　　"Oh, the wickedness of man is very great," said Villefort,"since it surpasses the goodness of God. Did you observethat man's eyes while he was speaking to us?"

　　"No."

　　"But have you ever watched him carefully?"

　　"Doubtless he is capricious, but that is all; one thingalone struck me, -- of all the exquisite things he placedbefore us, he touched nothing. I might have suspected he waspoisoning us."

　　"And you see you would have been deceived."

　　"Yes, doubtless."

　　"But believe me, that man has other projects. For thatreason I wished to see you, to speak to you, to warn youagainst every one, but especially against him. Tell me,"cried Villefort, fixing his eyes more steadfastly on herthan he had ever done before, "did you ever reveal to anyone our connection?"

　　"Never, to any one."

　　"You understand me," replied Villefort, affectionately;"when I say any one, -- pardon my urgency, -- to any oneliving I mean?"

　　"Yes, yes, I understand very well," ejaculated the baroness;"never, I swear to you."

　　"Were you ever in the habit of writing in the evening whathad transpired in the morning? Do you keep a journal?"

　　"No, my life has been passed in frivolity; I wish to forgetit myself."

　　"Do you talk in your sleep?"

　　"I sleep soundly, like a child; do you not remember?" Thecolor mounted to the baroness's face, and Villefort turnedawfully pale.

　　"It is true," said he, in so low a tone that he could hardlybe heard.

　　"Well?" said the baroness.

　　"Well, I understand what I now have to do," repliedVillefort. "In less than one week from this time I willascertain who this M. de Monte Cristo is, whence he comes,where he goes, and why he speaks in our presence of childrenthat have been disinterred in a garden." Villefortpronounced these words with an accent which would have madethe count shudder had he heard him. Then he pressed the handthe baroness reluctantly gave him, and led her respectfullyback to the door. Madame Danglars returned in another cab tothe passage, on the other side of which she found hercarriage, and her coachman sleeping peacefully on his boxwhile waiting for her.

　　Chapter 68A Summer Ball.

　　The same day during the interview between Madame Danglarsand the procureur, a travelling-carriage entered the Rue duHelder, passed through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped inthe yard. In a moment the door was opened, and Madame deMorcerf alighted, leaning on her son's arm. Albert soon lefther, ordered his horses, and having arranged his toilet,drove to the Champs Elysees, to the house of Monte Cristo.The count received him with his habitual smile. It was astrange thing that no one ever appeared to advance a step inthat man's favor. Those who would, as it were, force apassage to his heart, found an impassable barrier. Morcerf,who ran towards him with open arms, was chilled as he drewnear, in spite of the friendly smile, and simply held outhis hand. Monte Cristo shook it coldly, according to hisinvariable practice. "Here I am, dear count."

　　"Welcome home again."

　　"I arrived an hour since."

　　"From Dieppe?"

　　"No, from Treport."

　　"Indeed?"

　　"And I have come at once to see you."

　　"That is extremely kind of you," said Monte Cristo with atone of perfect indifference.

　　"And what is the news?"

　　"You should not ask a stranger, a foreigner, for news."

　　"I know it, but in asking for news, I mean, have you doneanything for me?"

　　"Had you commissioned me?" said Monte Cristo, feigninguneasiness.

　　"Come, come," said Albert, "do not assume so muchindifference. It is said, sympathy travels rapidly, and whenat Treport, I felt the electric shock; you have either beenworking for me or thinking of me."

　　"Possibly," said Monte Cristo, "I have indeed thought ofyou, but the magnetic wire I was guiding acted, indeed,without my knowledge."

　　"Indeed? Pray tell me how it happened?"

　　"Willingly. M. Danglars dined with me."

　　"I know it; to avoid meeting him, my mother and I lefttown."

　　"But he met here M. Andrea Cavalcanti."

　　"Your Italian prince?"

　　"Not so fast; M. Andrea only calls himself count."

　　"Calls himself, do you say?"

　　"Yes, calls himself."

　　"Is he not a count?"

　　"What can I know of him? He calls himself so. I, of course,give him the same title, and every one else does likewise."

　　"What a strange man you are! What next? You say M. Danglarsdined here?"

　　"Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, MadameDanglars, M. and Madame de Villefort, -- charming people, --M. Debray, Maximilian Morrel, and M. de Chateau-Renaud."

　　"Did they speak of me?"

　　"Not a word."

　　"So much the worse."

　　"Why so? I thought you wished them to forget you?"

　　"If they did not speak of me, I am sure they thought aboutme, and I am in despair."

　　"How will that affect you, since Mademoiselle Danglars wasnot among the number here who thought of you? Truly, shemight have thought of you at home."

　　"I have no fear of that; or, if she did, it was only in thesame way in which I think of her."

　　"Touching sympathy! So you hate each other?" said the count.

　　"Listen," said Morcerf -- "if Mademoiselle Danglars weredisposed to take pity on my supposed martyrdom on heraccount, and would dispense with all matrimonial formalitiesbetween our two families, I am ready to agree to thearrangement. In a word, Mademoiselle Danglars would make acharming mistress -- but a wife -- diable!"

　　"And this," said Monte Cristo, "is your opinion of yourintended spouse?"

　　"Yes; it is rather unkind, I acknowledge, but it is true.But as this dream cannot be realized, since MademoiselleDanglars must become my lawful wife, live perpetually withme, sing to me, compose verses and music within ten paces ofme, and that for my whole life, it frightens me. One mayforsake a mistress, but a wife, -- good heavens! There shemust always be; and to marry Mademoiselle Danglars would beawful."

　　"You are difficult to please, viscount."

　　"Yes, for I often wish for what is impossible."

　　"What is that?"

　　"To find such a wife as my father found." Monte Cristoturned pale, and looked at Albert, while playing with somemagnificent pistols.

　　"Your father was fortunate, then?" said he.

　　"You know my opinion of my mother, count; look at her, --still beautiful, witty, more charming than ever. For anyother son to have stayed with his mother for four days atTreport, it would have been a condescension or a martyrdom,while I return, more contented, more peaceful -- shall I saymore poetic! -- than if I had taken Queen Mab or Titania asmy companion."

　　"That is an overwhelming demonstration, and you would makeevery one vow to live a single life."

　　"Such are my reasons for not liking to marry MademoiselleDanglars. Have you ever noticed how much a thing isheightened in value when we obtain possession of it? Thediamond which glittered in the window at Marle's or Fossin'sshines with more splendor when it is our own; but if we arecompelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, andstill must retain the one that is inferior, do you not knowwhat we have to endure?"

　　"Worldling," murmured the count.

　　"Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugenie perceives Iam but a pitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundredthousand francs as she has millions." Monte Cristo smiled."One plan occurred to me," continued Albert; "Franz likesall that is eccentric; I tried to make him fall in love withMademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, writtenin the most alluring style, he invariably answered: `Myeccentricity may be great, but it will not make me break mypromise.'"

　　"That is what I call devoted friendship, to recommend toanother one whom you would not marry yourself." Albertsmiled. -- "Apropos," continued he, "Franz is coming soon,but it will not interest you; you dislike him, I think?"

　　"I?" said Monte Cristo; "my dear Viscount, how have youdiscovered that I did not like M. Franz! I like every one."

　　"And you include me in the expression every one -- manythanks!"

　　"Let us not mistake," said Monte Cristo; "I love every oneas God commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; butI thoroughly hate but a few. Let us return to M. Franzd'Epinay. Did you say he was coming?"

　　"Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently asanxious to get Mademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglarsis to see Mademoiselle Eugenie settled. It must be a veryirksome office to be the father of a grown-up daughter; itseems to make one feverish, and to raise one's pulse toninety beats a minute until the deed is done."

　　"But M. d'Epinay, unlike you, bears his misfortunepatiently."

　　"Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on awhite tie, and speaks of his family. He entertains a veryhigh opinion of M. and Madame de Villefort."

　　"Which they deserve, do they not?"

　　"I believe they do. M. de Villefort has always passed for asevere but a just man."

　　"There is, then, one," said Monte Cristo, "whom you do notcondemn like poor Danglars?"

　　"Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps,"replied Albert, laughing.

　　"Indeed, my dear sir," said Monte Cristo, "you arerevoltingly foppish."

　　"I foppish? how do you mean?"

　　"Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, andto struggle to escape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars. Letthings take their course; perhaps you may not have toretract."

　　"Bah," said Albert, staring.

　　"Doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken byforce; and seriously, do you wish to break off yourengagement?"

　　"I would give a hundred thousand francs to be able to doso."

　　"Then make yourself quite easy. M. Danglars would givedouble that sum to attain the same end."

　　"Am I, indeed, so happy?" said Albert, who still could notprevent an almost imperceptible cloud passing across hisbrow. "But, my dear count, has M. Danglars any reason?"

　　"Ah, there is your proud and selfish nature. You wouldexpose the self-love of another with a hatchet, but youshrink if your own is attacked with a needle."

　　"But yet M. Danglars appeared" --

　　"Delighted with you, was he not? Well, he is a man of badtaste, and is still more enchanted with another. I know notwhom; look and judge for yourself."

　　"Thank you, I understand. But my mother -- no, not mymother; I mistake -- my father intends giving a ball."

　　"A ball at this season?"

　　"Summer balls are fashionable."

　　"If they were not, the countess has only to wish it, andthey would become so."

　　"You are right; You know they are select affairs; those whoremain in Paris in July must be true Parisians. Will youtake charge of our invitation to Messieurs Cavalcanti?"

　　"When will it take place?"

　　"On Saturday."

　　"M. Cavalcanti's father will be gone."

　　"But the son will be here; will you invite young M.Cavalcanti?"

　　"I do not know him, viscount."

　　"You do not know him?"

　　"No, I never saw him until a few days since, and am notresponsible for him."

　　"But you receive him at your house?"

　　"That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a goodabbe, who may be deceived. Give him a direct invitation, butdo not ask me to present him. If he were afterwards to marryMademoiselle Danglars, you would accuse me of intrigue, andwould be challenging me, -- besides, I may not be theremyself."

　　"Where?"

　　"At your ball."

　　"Why should you not be there?"

　　"Because you have not yet invited me."

　　"But I come expressly for that purpose."

　　"You are very kind, but I may be prevented."

　　"If I tell you one thing, you will be so amiable as to setaside all impediments."

　　"Tell me what it is."

　　"My mother begs you to come."

　　"The Comtesse de Morcerf?" said Monte Cristo, starting.

　　"Ah, count," said Albert, "I assure you Madame de Morcerfspeaks freely to me, and if you have not felt thosesympathetic fibres of which I spoke just now thrill withinyou, you must be entirely devoid of them, for during thelast four days we have spoken of no one else."

　　"You have talked of me?"

　　"Yes, that is the penalty of being a living puzzle!"

　　"Then I am also a puzzle to your mother? I should havethought her too reasonable to be led by imagination."

　　"A problem, my dear count, for every one -- for my mother aswell as others; much studied, but not solved, you stillremain an enigma, do not fear. My mother is only astonishedthat you remain so long unsolved. I believe, while theCountess G---- takes you for Lord Ruthven, my motherimagines you to be Cagliostro or the Count Saint-Germain.The first opportunity you have, confirm her in her opinion;it will be easy for you, as you have the philosophy of theone and the wit of the other."

　　"I thank you for the warning," said the count; "I shallendeavor to be prepared for all suppositions."

　　"You will, then, come on Saturday?"

　　"Yes, since Madame de Morcerf invites me."

　　"You are very kind."

　　"Will M. Danglars be there?"

　　"He has already been invited by my father. We shall try topersuade the great d'Aguesseau,* M. de Villefort, to come,but have not much hope of seeing him."

　　"`Never despair of anything,' says the proverb."

　　* Magistrate and orator of great eloquence -- chancellor ofFrance under Louis XV.

　　"Do you dance, count?"

　　"I dance?"

　　"Yes, you; it would not be astonishing."

　　"That is very well before one is over forty. No, I do notdance, but I like to see others do so. Does Madame deMorcerf dance?"

　　"Never; you can talk to her, she so delights in yourconversation."

　　"Indeed?"

　　"Yes, truly; and I assure you. You are the only man of whomI have heard her speak with interest." Albert rose and tookhis hat; the count conducted him to the door. "I have onething to reproach myself with," said he, stopping Albert onthe steps. "What is it?"

　　"I have spoken to you indiscreetly about Danglars."

　　"On the contrary, speak to me always in the same strainabout him."

　　"I am glad to be reassured on that point. Apropos, when doyou aspect M. d'Epinay?"

　　"Five or six days hence at the latest."

　　"And when is he to be married?"

　　"Immediately on the arrival of M. and Madame deSaint-Meran."

　　"Bring him to see me. Although you say I do not like him, Iassure you I shall be happy to see him."

　　"I will obey your orders, my lord."

　　"Good-by."

　　"Until Saturday, when I may expect you, may I not?"

　　"Yes, I promised you." The Count watched Albert, waving hishand to him. When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristoturned, and seeing Bertuccio, "What news?" said he. "Shewent to the Palais," replied the steward.

　　"Did she stay long there?"

　　"An hour and a half."

　　"Did she return home?"

　　"Directly."

　　"Well, my dear Bertuccio," said the count, "I now advise youto go in quest of the little estate I spoke to you of inNormandy." Bertuccio bowed, and as his wishes were inperfect harmony with the order he had received, he startedthe same evening.

　　Chapter 69The Inquiry.

　　M. de Villefort kept the promise he had made to MadameDanglars, to endeavor to find out how the Count of MonteCristo had discovered the history of the house at Auteuil.He wrote the same day for the required information to M. deBoville, who, from having been an inspector of prisons, waspromoted to a high office in the police; and the latterbegged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would bemost likely to give him full particulars. At the end of thesecond day M. de Villefort received the following note: --

　　"The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimateacquaintance of Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who issometimes seen in Paris and who is there at this moment; heis also known to the Abbe Busoni, a Sicilian priest, of highrepute in the East, where he has done much good."

　　M. de Villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiriesto be made respecting these two persons; his orders wereexecuted, and the following evening he received thesedetails: --

　　"The abbe, who was in Paris only for a month, inhabited asmall two-storied house behind Saint-Sulpice; there were tworooms on each floor and he was the only tenant. The twolower rooms consisted of a dining-room, with a table,chairs, and side-board of walnut, -- and a wainscotedparlor, without ornaments, carpet, or timepiece. It wasevident that the abbe limited himself to objects of strictnecessity. He preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs,which was more library than parlor, and was furnished withtheological books and parchments, in which he delighted tobury himself for months at a time, according to his valet dechambre. His valet looked at the visitors through a sort ofwicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeasedhim, he replied that the abbe was not in Paris, an answerwhich satisfied most persons, because the abbe was known tobe a great traveller. Besides, whether at home or not,whether in Paris or Cairo, the abbe always left something togive away, which the valet distributed through this wicketin his master's name. The other room near the library was abedroom. A bed without curtains, four arm-chairs, and acouch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, composed, with aprie-Dieu, all its furniture. Lord Wilmore resided in RueFontaine-Saint-George. He was one of those English touristswho consume a large fortune in travelling. He hired theapartment in which he lived furnished, passed only a fewhours in the day there, and rarely slept there. One of hispeculiarities was never to speak a word of French, which hehowever wrote with great facility."

　　The day after this important information had been given tothe king's attorney, a man alighted from a carriage at thecorner of the Rue Ferou, and rapping at an olive-green door,asked if the Abbe Busoni were within. "No, he went out earlythis morning," replied the valet.

　　"I might not always be content with that answer," repliedthe visitor, "for I come from one to whom everyone must beat home. But have the kindness to give the Abbe Busoni" --

　　"I told you he was not at home," repeated the valet. "Thenon his return give him that card and this sealed paper. Willhe be at home at eight o'clock this evening?"

　　"Doubtless, unless he is at work, which is the same as if hewere out."

　　"I will come again at that time," replied the visitor, whothen retired.

　　At the appointed hour the same man returned in the samecarriage, which, instead of stopping this time at the end ofthe Rue Ferou, drove up to the green door. He knocked, andit opened immediately to admit him. From the signs ofrespect the valet paid him, he saw that his note hadproduced a good effect. "Is the abbe at home?" asked he.

　　"Yes; he is at work in his library, but he expects you,sir," replied the valet. The stranger ascended a roughstaircase, and before a table, illumined by a lamp whoselight was concentrated by a large shade while the rest ofthe apartment was in partial darkness, he perceived the abbein a monk's dress, with a cowl on his head such as was usedby learned men of the Middle Ages. "Have I the honor ofaddressing the Abbe Busoni?" asked the visitor.

　　"Yes, sir," replied the abbe; "and you are the person whomM. de Boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to mefrom the prefect of police?"

　　"Exactly, sir."

　　"One of the agents appointed to secure the safety of Paris?"

　　"Yes, sir"" replied the stranger with a slight hesitation,and blushing.

　　The abbe replaced the large spectacles, which covered notonly his eyes but his temples, and sitting down motioned tohis visitor to do the same. "I am at your service, sir,"said the abbe, with a marked Italian accent.

　　"The mission with which I am charged, sir," replied thevisitor, speaking with hesitation, "is a confidential one onthe part of him who fulfils it, and him by whom he isemployed." The abbe bowed. "Your probity," replied thestranger, "is so well known to the prefect that he wishes asa magistrate to ascertain from you some particularsconnected with the public safety, to ascertain which I amdeputed to see you. It is hoped that no ties of friendshipor humane consideration will induce you to conceal thetruth."

　　"Provided, sir, the particulars you wish for do notinterfere with my scruples or my conscience. I am a priest,sir, and the secrets of confession, for instance, mustremain between me and God, and not between me and humanjustice."

　　"Do not alarm yourself, monsieur, we will duly respect yourconscience."

　　At this moment the abbe pressed down his side of the shadeand so raised it on the other, throwing a bright light onthe stranger's face, while his own remained obscured."Excuse me, abbe," said the envoy of the prefect of thepolice, "but the light tries my eyes very much." The abbelowered the shade. "Now, sir, I am listening -- go on."

　　"I will come at once to the point. Do you know the Count ofMonte Cristo?"

　　"You mean Monsieur Zaccone, I presume?"

　　"Zaccone? -- is not his name Monte Cristo?"

　　"Monte Cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of arock, and not a family name."

　　"Well, be it so -- let us not dispute about words; and sinceM. de Monte Cristo and M. Zaccone are the same" --

　　"Absolutely the same."

　　"Let us speak of M. Zaccone."

　　"Agreed."

　　"I asked you if you knew him?"

　　"Extremely well."

　　"Who is he?"

　　"The son of a rich shipbuilder in Malta."

　　"I know that is the report; but, as you are aware, thepolice does not content itself with vague reports."

　　"However," replied the abbe, with an affable smile, "whenthat report is in accordance with the truth, everybody mustbelieve it, the police as well as all the rest."

　　"Are you sure of what you assert?"

　　"What do you mean by that question?"

　　"Understand, sir, I do not in the least suspect yourveracity; I ask if you are certain of it?"

　　"I knew his father, M. Zaccone."

　　"Ah, indeed?"

　　"And when a child I often played with the son in thetimber-yards."

　　"But whence does he derive the title of count?"

　　"You are aware that may be bought."

　　"In Italy?"

　　"Everywhere."

　　"And his immense riches, whence does he procure them?"

　　"They may not be so very great."

　　"How much do you suppose he possesses?"

　　"From one hundred and fifty to two hundred thousand livresper annum."

　　"That is reasonable," said the visitor; "I have heard he hadthree or four millions."

　　"Two hundred thousand per annum would make four millions ofcapital."

　　"But I was told he had four millions per annum?"

　　"That is not probable."

　　"Do you know this Island of Monte Cristo?"

　　"Certainly, every one who has come from Palermo, Naples, orRome to France by sea must know it, since he has passedclose to it and must have seen it."

　　"I am told it is a delightful place?"

　　"It is a rock."

　　"And why has the count bought a rock?"

　　"For the sake of being a count. In Italy one must haveterritorial possessions to be a count."

　　"You have, doubtless, heard the adventures of M. Zaccone'syouth?"

　　"The father's?"

　　"No, the son's."

　　"I know nothing certain; at that period of his life, I lostsight of my young comrade."

　　"Was he in the wars?"

　　"I think he entered the service."

　　"In what branch?"

　　"In the navy."

　　"Are you not his confessor?"

　　"No, sir; I believe he is a Lutheran."

　　"A Lutheran?"

　　"I say, I believe such is the case, I do not affirm it;besides, liberty of conscience is established in France."

　　"Doubtless, and we are not now inquiring into his creed, buthis actions; in the name of the prefect of police, I ask youwhat you know of him.

　　"He passes for a very charitable man. Our holy father, thepope, has made him a knight of Jesus Christ for the serviceshe rendered to the Christians in the East; he has five orsix rings as testimonials from Eastern monarchs of hisservices."

　　"Does he wear them?"

　　"No, but he is proud of them; he is better pleased withrewards given to the benefactors of man than to hisdestroyers."

　　"He is a Quaker then?"

　　"Exactly, he is a Quaker, with the exception of the peculiardress."

　　"Has he any friends?"

　　"Yes, every one who knows him is his friend."

　　"But has he any enemies?"

　　"One only."

　　"What is his name?"

　　"Lord Wilmore."

　　"Where is he?"

　　"He is in Paris just now."

　　"Can he give me any particulars?"

　　"Important ones; he was in India with Zaccone."

　　"Do you know his abode?"

　　"It's somewhere in the Chaussee d'Antin; but I know neitherthe street nor the number."

　　"Are you at variance with the Englishman?"

　　"I love Zaccone, and he hates him; we are consequently notfriends."

　　"Do you think the Count of Monte Cristo had ever been inFrance before he made this visit to Paris?"

　　"To that question I can answer positively; no, sir, he hadnot, because he applied to me six months ago for theparticulars he required, and as I did not know when I mightagain come to Paris, I recommended M. Cavalcanti to him."

　　"Andrea?"

　　"No, Bartolomeo, his father."

　　"Now, sir, I have but one question more to ask, and I chargeyou, in the name of honor, of humanity, and of religion, toanswer me candidly."

　　"What is it, sir?"

　　"Do you know with what design M. de Monte Cristo purchased ahouse at Auteuil?"

　　"Certainly, for he told me."

　　"What is it, sir?"

　　"To make a lunatic asylum of it, similar to that founded bythe Count of Pisani at Palermo. Do you know about thatinstitution?"

　　"I have heard of it."

　　"It is a magnificent charity." Having said this, the abbebowed to imply he wished to pursue his studies. The visitoreither understood the abbe's meaning, or had no morequestions to ask; he arose, and the abbe accompanied him tothe door. "You are a great almsgiver," said the visitor,"and although you are said to be rich, I will venture tooffer you something for your poor people; will you accept myoffering?"

　　"I thank you, sir; I am only jealous in one thing, and thatis that the relief I give should be entirely from my ownresources."

　　"However" --

　　"My resolution, sir, is unchangeable, but you have only tosearch for yourself and you will find, alas, but too manyobjects upon whom to exercise your benevolence." The abbeonce more bowed as he opened the door, the stranger bowedand took his leave, and the carriage conveyed him straightto the house of M. de Villefort. An hour afterwards thecarriage was again ordered, and this time it went to the RueFontaine-Saint-George, and stopped at No. 5, where LordWilmore lived. The stranger had written to Lord Wilmore,requesting an interview, which the latter had fixed for teno'clock. As the envoy of the prefect of police arrived tenminutes before ten, he was told that Lord Wilmore, who wasprecision and punctuality personified, was not yet come in,but that he would be sure to return as the clock struck.

　　The visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which waslike all other furnished drawing-rooms. A mantle-piece, withtwo modern Sevres vases, a timepiece representing Cupid withhis bent bow, a mirror with an engraving on each side -- onerepresenting Homer carrying his guide, the other, Belisariusbegging -- a grayish paper; red and black tapestry -- suchwas the appearance of Lord Wilmore's drawing-room. It wasilluminated by lamps with ground-glass shades which gaveonly a feeble light, as if out of consideration for theenvoy's weak sight. After ten minutes' expectation the clockstruck ten; at the fifth stroke the door opened and LordWilmore appeared. He was rather above the middle height,with thin reddish whiskers, light complexion and light hair,turning rather gray. He was dressed with all the Englishpeculiarity, namely, in a blue coat, with gilt buttons andhigh collar, in the fashion of 1811, a white kerseymerewaistcoat, and nankeen pantaloons, three inches too short,but which were prevented by straps from slipping up to theknee. His first remark on entering was, -- "You know, sir, Ido not speak French?"

　　"I know you do not like to converse in our language,"replied the envoy. "But you may use it," replied LordWilmore; "I understand it."

　　"And I," replied the visitor, changing his idiom, "knowenough of English to keep up the conversation. Do not putyourself to the slightest inconvenience."

　　"Aw?" said Lord Wilmore, with that tone which is only knownto natives of Great Britain.

　　The envoy presented his letter of introduction, which thelatter read with English coolness, and having finished, --"I understand," said he, "perfectly."

　　Then began the questions, which were similar to those whichhad been addressed to the Abbe Busoni. But as Lord Wilmore,in the character of the count's enemy, was less restrainedin his answers, they were more numerous; he described theyouth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten years of age,entered the service of one of the petty sovereigns of Indiawho make war on the English. It was there Wilmore had firstmet him and fought against him; and in that war Zaccone hadbeen taken prisoner, sent to England, and consigned to thehulks, whence he had escaped by swimming. Then began histravels, his duels, his caprices; then the insurrection inGreece broke out, and he had served in the Grecian ranks.While in that service he had discovered a silver mine in themountains of Thessaly, but he had been careful to conceal itfrom every one. After the battle of Navarino, when the Greekgovernment was consolidated, he asked of King Otho a mininggrant for that district, which was given him. Hence thatimmense fortune, which, in Lord Wilmore's opinion, possiblyamounted to one or two millions per annum, -- a precariousfortune, which might be momentarily lost by the failure ofthe mine.

　　"But," asked the visitor, "do you know why he came toFrance?"

　　"He is speculating in railways," said Lord Wilmore, "and ashe is an expert chemist and physicist, he has invented a newsystem of telegraphy, which he is seeking to bring toperfection."

　　"How much does he spend yearly?" asked the prefect.

　　"Not more than five or six hundred thousand francs," saidLord Wilmore; "he is a miser." Hatred evidently inspired theEnglishman, who, knowing no other reproach to bring on thecount, accused him of avarice. "Do you know his house atAuteuil?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"What do you know respecting it?"

　　"Do you wish to know why he bought it?"

　　"Yes."

　　"The count is a speculator, who will certainly ruin himselfin experiments. He supposes there is in the neighborhood ofthe house he has bought a mineral spring equal to those atBagneres, Luchon, and Cauterets. He is going to turn hishouse into a Badhaus, as the Germans term it. He has alreadydug up all the garden two or three times to find the famousspring, and, being unsuccessful, he will soon purchase allthe contiguous houses. Now, as I dislike him, and hope hisrailway, his electric telegraph, or his search for baths,will ruin him, I am watching for his discomfiture, whichmust soon take place."

　　"What was the cause of your quarrel?"

　　"When he was in England he seduced the wife of one of myfriends."

　　"Why do you not seek revenge?"

　　"I have already fought three duels with him," said theEnglishman, "the first with the pistol, the second with thesword, and the third with the sabre."

　　"And what was the result of those duels?"

　　"The first time, he broke my arm; the second, he wounded mein the breast; and the third time, made this large wound."The Englishman turned down his shirt-collar, and showed ascar, whose redness proved it to be a recent one. "So that,you see, there is a deadly feud between us."

　　"But," said the envoy, "you do not go about it in the rightway to kill him, if I understand you correctly."

　　"Aw?" said the Englishman, "I practice shooting every day,and every other day Grisier comes to my house."

　　This was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather,

　　all the Englishman appeared to know. The agent arose, andhaving bowed to Lord Wilmore, who returned his salutationwith the stiff politeness of the English, he retired. LordWilmore, having heard the door close after him, returned tohis bedroom, where with one hand he pulled off his lighthair, his red whiskers, his false jaw, and his wound, toresume the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teeth ofthe Count of Monte Cristo. It was M. de Villefort, and notthe prefect, who returned to the house of M. de Villefort.The procureur felt more at ease, although he had learnednothing really satisfactory, and, for the first time sincethe dinner-party at Auteuil, he slept soundly.

　　Chapter 70The Ball.

　　It was in the warmest days of July, when in due course oftime the Saturday arrived upon which the ball was to takeplace at M. de Morcerf's. It was ten o'clock at night; thebranches of the great trees in the garden of the count'shouse stood out boldly against the azure canopy of heaven,which was studded with golden stars, but where the lastfleeting clouds of a vanishing storm yet lingered. From theapartments on the ground-floor might be heard the sound ofmusic, with the whirl of the waltz and galop, whilebrilliant streams of light shone through the openings of theVenetian blinds. At this moment the garden was only occupiedby about ten servants, who had just received orders fromtheir mistress to prepare the supper, the serenity of theweather continuing to increase. Until now, it had beenundecided whether the supper should take place in thedining-room, or under a long tent erected on the lawn, butthe beautiful blue sky, studded with stars, had settled thequestion in favor of the lawn. The gardens were illuminatedwith colored lanterns, according to the Italian custom, and,as is usual in countries where the luxuries of the table --the rarest of all luxuries in their complete form -- arewell understood, the supper-table was loaded with wax-lightsand flowers.

　　At the time the Countess of Morcerf returned to the rooms,after giving her orders, many guests were arriving, moreattracted by the charming hospitality of the countess thanby the distinguished position of the count; for, owing tothe good taste of Mercedes, one was sure of finding somedevices at her entertainment worthy of describing, or evencopying in case of need. Madame Danglars, in whom the eventswe have related had caused deep anxiety, had hesitated aboutgoing to Madame de Morcerf's, when during the morning hercarriage happened to meet that of Villefort. The latter madea sign, and when the carriages had drawn close together,said, -- "You are going to Madame de Morcerf's, are younot?"

　　"No," replied Madame Danglars, "I am too ill."

　　"You are wrong," replied Villefort, significantly; "it isimportant that you should be seen there."

　　"Do you think so?" asked the baroness.

　　"I do."

　　"In that case I will go." And the two carriages passed ontowards their different destinations. Madame Danglarstherefore came, not only beautiful in person, but radiantwith splendor; she entered by one door at the time whenMercedes appeared at the door. The countess took Albert tomeet Madame Danglars. He approached, paid her some wellmerited compliments on her toilet, and offered his arm toconduct her to a seat. Albert looked around him. "You arelooking for my daughter?" said the baroness, smiling.

　　"I confess it," replied Albert. "Could you have been socruel as not to bring her?"

　　"Calm yourself. She has met Mademoiselle de Villefort, andhas taken her arm; see, they are following us, both in whitedresses, one with a bouquet of camellias, the other with oneof myosotis. But tell me" --

　　"Well, what do you wish to know?"

　　"Will not the Count of Monte Cristo be here to-night?"

　　"Seventeen!" replied Albert.

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"I only mean that the count seems the rage," replied theviscount, smiling, "and that you are the seventeenth personthat has asked me the same question. The count is infashion; I congratulate him upon it."

　　"And have you replied to every one as you have to me?"

　　"Ah, to be sure, I have not answered you; be satisfied, weshall have this `lion;' we are among the privileged ones."

　　"Were you at the opera yesterday?"

　　"No."

　　"He was there."

　　"Ah, indeed? And did the eccentric person commit any neworiginality?"

　　"Can he be seen without doing so? Elssler was dancing in the`Diable Boiteux;' the Greek princess was in ecstasies. Afterthe cachucha he placed a magnificent ring on the stem of abouquet, and threw it to the charming danseuse, who, in thethird act, to do honor to the gift, reappeared with it onher finger. And the Greek princess, -- will she be here?"

　　"No, you will be deprived of that pleasure; her position inthe count's establishment is not sufficiently understood."

　　"Wait; leave me here, and go and speak to Madame deVillefort, who is trying to attract your attention."

　　Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madamede Villefort, whose lips opened as he approached. "I wageranything," said Albert, interrupting her, "that I know whatyou were about to say."

　　"Well, what is it?"

　　"If I guess rightly, will you confess it?"

　　"Yes."

　　"On your honor?"

　　"On my honor."

　　"You were going to ask me if the Count of Monte Cristo hadarrived, or was expected."

　　"Not at all. It is not of him that I am now thinking. I wasgoing to ask you if you had received any news of MonsieurFranz."

　　"Yes, -- yesterday."

　　"What did he tell you?"

　　"That he was leaving at the same time as his letter."

　　"Well, now then, the count?"

　　"The count will come, of that you may be satisfied."

　　"You know that he has another name besides Monte Cristo?"

　　"No, I did not know it."

　　"Monte Cristo in the name of an island, and he has a familyname."

　　"I never heard it."

　　"Well, then, I am better informed than you; his name isZaccone."

　　"It is possible."

　　"He is a Maltese."

　　"That is also possible.

　　"The son of a shipowner."

　　"Really, you should relate all this aloud, you would havethe greatest success."

　　"He served in India, discovered a mine in Thessaly, andcomes to Paris to establish a mineral water-cure atAuteuil."

　　"Well, I'm sure," said Morcerf, "this is indeed news! Am Iallowed to repeat it?"

　　"Yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at a time, and do notsay I told you."

　　"Why so?"

　　"Because it is a secret just discovered."

　　"By whom?"

　　"The police."

　　"Then the news originated" --

　　"At the prefect's last night. Paris, you can understand, isastonished at the sight of such unusual splendor, and thepolice have made inquiries."

　　"Well, well! Nothing more is wanting than to arrest thecount as a vagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich."

　　"Indeed, that doubtless would have happened if hiscredentials had not been so favorable."

　　"Poor count! And is he aware of the danger he has been in?"

　　"I think not."

　　"Then it will be but charitable to inform him. When hearrives, I will not fail to do so."

　　Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, blackhair, and glossy mustache, respectfully bowed to Madame deVillefort. Albert extended his hand. "Madame," said Albert,"allow me to present to you M. Maximilian Morrel, captain ofSpahis, one of our best, and, above all, of our bravestofficers."

　　"I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentlemanat Auteuil, at the house of the Count of Monte Cristo,"replied Madame de Villefort, turning away with markedcoldness of manner. This answer, and especially the tone inwhich it was uttered, chilled the heart of poor Morrel. Buta recompense was in store for him; turning around, he sawnear the door a beautiful fair face, whose large blue eyeswere, without any marked expression, fixed upon him, whilethe bouquet of myosotis was gently raised to her lips.

　　The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with thesame expression in his eyes, placed his handkerchief to hismouth; and these two living statues, whose hearts beat soviolently under their marble aspect, separated from eachother by the whole length of the room, forgot themselves fora moment, or rather forgot the world in their mutualcontemplation. They might have remained much longer lost inone another, without any one noticing their abstraction. TheCount of Monte Cristo had just entered.

　　We have already said that there was something in the countwhich attracted universal attention wherever he appeared. Itwas not the coat, unexceptional in its cut, though simpleand unornamented; it was not the plain white waistcoat; itwas not the trousers, that displayed the foot so perfectlyformed -- it was none of these things that attracted theattention, -- it was his pale complexion, his waving blackhair, his calm and serene expression, his dark andmelancholy eye, his mouth, chiselled with such marvellousdelicacy, which so easily expressed such high disdain, --these were what fixed the attention of all upon him. Manymen might have been handsomer, but certainly there could benone whose appearance was more significant, if theexpression may be used. Everything about the count seemed tohave its meaning, for the constant habit of thought which hehad acquired had given an ease and vigor to the expressionof his face, and even to the most trifling gesture, scarcelyto be understood. Yet the Parisian world is so strange, thateven all this might not have won attention had there notbeen connected with it a mysterious story gilded by animmense fortune.

　　Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests undera battery of curious glances towards Madame de Morcerf, who,standing before a mantle-piece ornamented with flowers, hadseen his entrance in a looking-glass placed opposite thedoor, and was prepared to receive him. She turned towardshim with a serene smile just at the moment he was bowing toher. No doubt she fancied the count would speak to her,while on his side the count thought she was about to addresshim; but both remained silent, and after a mere bow, MonteCristo directed his steps to Albert, who received himcordially. "Have you seen my mother?" asked Albert.

　　"I have just had the pleasure," replied the count; "but Ihave not seen your father."

　　"See, he is down there, talking politics with that littlegroup of great geniuses."

　　"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo; "and so those gentlemen downthere are men of great talent. I should not have guessed it.And for what kind of talent are they celebrated? You knowthere are different sorts."

　　"That tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, hediscovered, in the neighborhood of Rome, a kind of lizardwith a vertebra more than lizards usually have, and heimmediately laid his discovery before the Institute. Thething was discussed for a long time, but finally decided inhis favor. I can assure you the vertebra made a great noisein the learned world, and the gentleman, who was only aknight of the Legion of Honor, was made an officer."

　　"Come," said Monte Cristo, "this cross seems to me to bewisely awarded. I suppose, had he found another additionalvertebra, they would have made him a commander."

　　"Very likely," said Albert.

　　"And who can that person be who has taken it into his headto wrap himself up in a blue coat embroidered with green?"

　　"Oh, that coat is not his own idea; it is the Republic's,which deputed David* to devise a uniform for theAcademicians."

　　* Louis David, a famous French painter.

　　"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo; "so this gentleman is anAcademician?"

　　"Within the last week he has been made one of the learnedassembly."

　　"And what is his especial talent?"

　　"His talent? I believe he thrusts pins through the heads ofrabbits, he makes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinalmarrow out of dogs with whalebone."

　　"And he is made a member of the Academy of Sciences forthis?"

　　"No; of the French Academy."

　　"But what has the French Academy to do with all this?"

　　"I was going to tell you. It seems" --

　　"That his experiments have very considerably advanced thecause of science, doubtless?"

　　"No; that his style of writing is very good."

　　"This must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbitsinto whose heads he has thrust pins, to the fowls whosebones he has dyed red, and to the dogs whose spinal marrowhe has punched out?"

　　Albert laughed.

　　"And the other one?" demanded the count.

　　"That one?"

　　"Yes, the third."

　　"The one in the dark blue coat?"

　　"Yes."

　　"He is a colleague of the count, and one of the most activeopponents to the idea of providing the Chamber of Peers witha uniform. He was very successful upon that question. Hestood badly with the Liberal papers, but his nobleopposition to the wishes of the court is now getting himinto favor with the journalists. They talk of making him anambassador."

　　"And what are his claims to the peerage?"

　　"He has composed two or three comic operas, written four orfive articles in the Siecle, and voted five or six years onthe ministerial side."

　　"Bravo, Viscount," said Monte Cristo, smiling; "you are adelightful cicerone. And now you will do me a favor, willyou not?"

　　"What is it?"

　　"Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and shouldthey wish it, you will warn me." Just then the count felthis arm pressed. He turned round; it was Danglars.

　　"Ah, is it you, baron?" said he.

　　"Why do you call me baron?" said Danglars; "you know that Icare nothing for my title. I am not like you, viscount; youlike your title, do you not?"

　　"Certainly," replied Albert, "seeing that without my title Ishould be nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, wouldstill remain the millionaire."

　　"Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty ofJuly," replied Danglars.

　　"Unfortunately," said Monte Cristo, "one's title to amillionaire does not last for life, like that of baron, peerof France, or Academician; for example, the millionairesFranck & Poulmann, of Frankfort, who have just becomebankrupts."

　　"Indeed?" said Danglars, becoming pale.

　　"Yes; I received the news this evening by a courier. I hadabout a million in their hands, but, warned in time, Iwithdrew it a month ago."

　　"Ah, mon Dieu," exclaimed Danglars, "they have drawn on mefor 200,000 francs!"

　　"Well, you can throw out the draft; their signature is worthfive per cent."

　　"Yes, but it is too late," said Danglars, "I have honoredtheir bills."

　　"Then," said Monte Cristo, "here are 200,000 francs goneafter" --

　　"Hush, do not mention these things," said Danglars; then,approaching Monte Cristo, he added, "especially before youngM. Cavalcanti;" after which he smiled, and turned towardsthe young man in question. Albert had left the count tospeak to his mother, Danglars to converse with youngCavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone. Meanwhilethe heat became excessive. The footmen were hasteningthrough the rooms with waiters loaded with ices. MonteCristo wiped the perspiration from his forehead, but drewback when the waiter was presented to him; he took norefreshment. Madame de Morcerf did not lose sight of MonteCristo; she saw that he took nothing, and even noticed hisgesture of refusal.

　　"Albert," she asked, "did you notice that?"

　　"What, mother?"

　　"That the count has never been willing to partake of foodunder the roof of M. de Morcerf."

　　"Yes; but then he breakfasted with me -- indeed, he made hisfirst appearance in the world on that occasion."

　　"But your house is not M. de Morcerf's," murmured Mercedes;"and since he has been here I have watched him."

　　"Well?"

　　"Well, he has taken nothing yet."

　　"The count is very temperate." Mercedes smiled sadly."Approach him," said she, "and when the next waiter passes,insist upon his taking something."

　　"But why, mother?"

　　"Just to please me, Albert," said Mercedes. Albert kissedhis mother's hand, and drew near the count. Another salverpassed, loaded like the preceding ones; she saw Albertattempt to persuade the count, but he obstinately refused.Albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.

　　"Well," said she, "you see he refuses?"

　　"Yes; but why need this annoy you?"

　　"You know, Albert, women are singular creatures. I shouldlike to have seen the count take something in my house, ifonly an ice. Perhaps he cannot reconcile himself to theFrench style of living, and might prefer something else."

　　"Oh, no; I have seen him eat of everything in Italy; nodoubt he does not feel inclined this evening."

　　"And besides," said the countess, "accustomed as he is toburning climates, possibly he does not feel the heat as wedo."

　　"I do not think that, for he has complained of feelingalmost suffocated, and asked why the Venetian blinds werenot opened as well as the windows."

　　"In a word," said Mercedes, "it was a way of assuring methat his abstinence was intended." And she left the room. Aminute afterwards the blinds were thrown open, and throughthe jessamine and clematis that overhung the window onecould see the garden ornamented with lanterns, and thesupper laid under the tent. Dancers, players, talkers, alluttered an exclamation of joy -- every one inhaled withdelight the breeze that floated in. At the same timeMercedes reappeared, paler than before, but with thatimperturbable expression of countenance which she sometimeswore. She went straight to the group of which her husbandformed the centre. "Do not detain those gentlemen here,count," she said; "they would prefer, I should think, tobreathe in the garden rather than suffocate here, since theyare not playing."

　　"Ah," said a gallant old general, who, in 1809, had sung"Partant pour la Syrie," -- "we will not go alone to thegarden."

　　"Then," said Mercedes, "I will lead the way." Turningtowards Monte Cristo, she added, "count, will you oblige mewith your arm?" The count almost staggered at these simplewords; then he fixed his eyes on Mercedes. It was only amomentary glance, but it seemed to the countess to havelasted for a century, so much was expressed in that onelook. He offered his arm to the countess; she took it, orrather just touched it with her little hand, and theytogether descended the steps, lined with rhododendrons andcamellias. Behind them, by another outlet, a group of abouttwenty persons rushed into the garden with loud exclamationsof delight.

　　Chapter 71Bread and Salt.

　　Madame de Morcerf entered an archway of trees with hercompanion. It led through a grove of lindens to aconservatory.

　　"It was too warm in the room, was it not, count?" she asked.

　　"Yes, madame; and it was an excellent idea of yours to openthe doors and the blinds." As he ceased speaking, the countfelt the hand of Mercedes tremble. "But you," he said, "withthat light dress, and without anything to cover you but thatgauze scarf, perhaps you feel cold?"

　　"Do you know where I am leading you?" said the countess,without replying to the question.

　　"No, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "but you see I make noresistance."

　　"We are going to the greenhouse that you see at the otherend of the grove."

　　The count looked at Mercedes as if to interrogate her, butshe continued to walk on in silence, and he refrained fromspeaking. They reached the building, ornamented withmagnificent fruits, which ripen at the beginning of July inthe artificial temperature which takes the place of the sun,so frequently absent in our climate. The countess left thearm of Monte Cristo, and gathered a bunch of Muscatelgrapes. "See, count," she said, with a smile so sad in itsexpression that one could almost detect the tears on hereyelids -- "see, our French grapes are not to be compared, Iknow, with yours of Sicily and Cyprus, but you will makeallowance for our northern sun." The count bowed, butstepped back. "Do you refuse?" said Mercedes, in a tremulousvoice. "Pray excuse me, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "butI never eat Muscatel grapes."

　　Mercedes let them fall, and sighed. A magnificent peach washanging against an adjoining wall, ripened by the sameartificial heat. Mercedes drew near, and plucked the fruit."Take this peach, then," she said. The count again refused."What, again?" she exclaimed, in so plaintive an accent thatit seemed to stifle a sob; "really, you pain me."

　　A long silence followed; the peach, like the grapes, fell tothe ground. "Count," added Mercedes with a supplicatingglance, "there is a beautiful Arabian custom, which makeseternal friends of those who have together eaten bread andsalt under the same roof."

　　"I know it, madame," replied the count; "but we are inFrance, and not in Arabia, and in France eternal friendshipsare as rare as the custom of dividing bread and salt withone another."

　　"But," said the countess, breathlessly, with her eyes fixedon Monte Cristo, whose arm she convulsively pressed withboth hands, "we are friends, are we not?"

　　The count became pale as death, the blood rushed to hisheart, and then again rising, dyed his cheeks with crimson;his eyes swam like those of a man suddenly dazzled."Certainly, we are friends," he replied; "why should we notbe?" The answer was so little like the one Mercedes desired,that she turned away to give vent to a sigh, which soundedmore like a groan. "Thank you," she said. And they walked onagain. They went the whole length of the garden withoututtering a word. "Sir," suddenly exclaimed the countess,after their walk had continued ten minutes in silence, "isit true that you have seen so much, travelled so far, andsuffered so deeply?"

　　"I have suffered deeply, madame," answered Monte Cristo.

　　"But now you are happy?"

　　"Doubtless," replied the count, "since no one hears mecomplain."

　　"And your present happiness, has it softened your heart?"

　　"My present happiness equals my past misery," said thecount.

　　"Are you not married?" asked the countess. "I married?"exclaimed Monte Cristo, shuddering; "who could have told youso?"

　　"No one told me you were, but you have frequently been seenat the opera with a young and lovely woman."

　　"She is a slave whom I bought at Constantinople, madame, thedaughter of a prince. I have adopted her as my daughter,having no one else to love in the world."

　　"You live alone, then?"

　　"I do."

　　"You have no sister -- no son -- no father?"

　　"I have no one."

　　"How can you exist thus without any one to attach you tolife?"

　　"It is not my fault, madame. At Malta, I loved a young girl,was on the point of marrying her, when war came and carriedme away. I thought she loved me well enough to wait for me,and even to remain faithful to my memory. When I returnedshe was married. This is the history of most men who havepassed twenty years of age. Perhaps my heart was weaker thanthe hearts of most men, and I suffered more than they wouldhave done in my place; that is all." The countess stoppedfor a moment, as if gasping for breath. "Yes," she said,"and you have still preserved this love in your heart -- onecan only love once -- and did you ever see her again?"

　　"Never."

　　"Never?"

　　"I never returned to the country where she lived."

　　"To Malta?"

　　"Yes; Malta."

　　"She is, then, now at Malta?"

　　"I think so."

　　"And have you forgiven her for all she has made you suffer?"

　　"Her, -- yes."

　　"But only her; do you then still hate those who separatedyou?"

　　"I hate them? Not at all; why should I?" The countess placedherself before Monte Cristo, still holding in her hand aportion of the perfumed grapes. "Take some," she said."Madame, I never eat Muscatel grapes," replied Monte Cristo,as if the subject had not been mentioned before. Thecountess dashed the grapes into the nearest thicket, with agesture of despair. "Inflexible man!" she murmured. MonteCristo remained as unmoved as if the reproach had not beenaddressed to him. Albert at this moment ran in. "Oh,mother," he exclaimed, "such a misfortune his happened!"

　　"What? What has happened?" asked the countess, as thoughawakening from a sleep to the realities of life; "did yousay a misfortune? Indeed, I should expect misfortunes."

　　"M. de Villefort is here."

　　"Well?"

　　"He comes to fetch his wife and daughter."

　　"Why so?"

　　"Because Madame de Saint-Meran is just arrived in Paris,bringing the news of M. de Saint-Meran's death, which tookplace on the first stage after he left Marseilles. Madame deVillefort, who was in very good spirits, would neitherbelieve nor think of the misfortune, but MademoiselleValentine, at the first words, guessed the whole truth,notwithstanding all the precautions of her father; the blowstruck her like a thunderbolt, and she fell senseless."

　　"And how was M. de Saint-Meran related to Mademoiselle deVillefort?" said the count.

　　"He was her grandfather on the mother's side. He was cominghere to hasten her marriage with Franz."

　　"Ah, indeed?"

　　"So Franz must wait. Why was not M. de Saint-Meran alsograndfather to Mademoiselle Danglars?"

　　"Albert, Albert," said Madame de Morcerf, in a tone of mildreproof, "what are you saying? Ah, count, he esteems you sohighly, tell him that he has spoken amiss." And she took twoor three steps forward. Monte Cristo watched her with an airso thoughtful, and so full of affectionate admiration, thatshe turned back and grasped his hand; at the same time sheseized that of her son, and joined them together.

　　"We are friends; are we not?" she asked.

　　"Oh, madame, I do not presume to call myself your friend,but at all times I am your most respectful servant." Thecountess left with an indescribable pang in her heart, andbefore she had taken ten steps the count saw her raise herhandkerchief to her eyes. "Do not my mother and you agree?"asked Albert, astonished.

　　"On the contrary," replied the count, "did you not hear herdeclare that we were friends?" They re-entered thedrawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de Villefort hadjust quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that Morreldeparted almost at the same time.

　　Chapter 72Madame de Saint-Meran.

　　A gloomy scene had indeed just passed at the house of M. deVillefort. After the ladies had departed for the ball,whither all the entreaties of Madame de Villefort had failedin persuading him to accompany them, the procureur had shuthimself up in his study, according to his custom. with aheap of papers calculated to alarm any one else, but whichgenerally scarcely satisfied his inordinate desires. Butthis time the papers were a mere matter of form. Villeforthad secluded himself, not to study, but to reflect; and withthe door locked and orders given that he should not bedisturbed excepting for important business, he sat down inhis arm-chair and began to ponder over the events, theremembrance of which had during the last eight days filledhis mind with so many gloomy thoughts and bitterrecollections. Then, instead of plunging into the mass ofdocuments piled before him, he opened the drawer of hisdesk. touched a spring, and drew out a parcel of cherishedmemoranda, amongst which he had carefully arranged, incharacters only known to himself, the names of all thosewho, either in his political career, in money matters, atthe bar, or in his mysterious love affairs, had become hisenemies.

　　Their number was formidable, now that he had begun to fear,and yet these names, powerful though they were, had oftencaused him to smile with the same kind of satisfactionexperienced by a traveller who from the summit of a mountainbeholds at his feet the craggy eminences, the almostimpassable paths, and the fearful chasms, through which hehas so perilously climbed. When he had run over all thesenames in his memory, again read and studied them, commentingmeanwhile upon his lists, he shook his head.

　　"No," he murmured, "none of my enemies would have waited sopatiently and laboriously for so long a space of time, thatthey might now come and crush me with this secret.Sometimes, as Hamlet says --

　　`Foul deeds will rise,Tho, all the earth o'erwhelm them to men's eyes;'

　　but, like a phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead. Thestory has been told by the Corsican to some priest, who inhis turn has repeated it. M. de Monte Cristo may have heardit, and to enlighten himself -- but why should he wish toenlighten himself upon the subject?" asked Villefort, aftera moment's reflection, "what interest can this M. de MonteCristo or M. Zaccone, -- son of a shipowner of Malta,discoverer of a mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for thefirst time, -- what interest, I say, can he take indiscovering a gloomy, mysterious, and useless fact likethis? However, among all the incoherent details given to meby the Abbe Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend andthat enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in myopinion -- that in no period, in no case, in nocircumstance, could there have been any contact between himand me."

　　But Villefort uttered words which even he himself did notbelieve. He dreaded not so much the revelation, for he couldreply to or deny its truth; -- he cared little for thatmene, tekel, upharsin, which appeared suddenly in letters ofblood upon the wall; -- but what he was really anxious forwas to discover whose hand had traced them. While he wasendeavoring to calm his fears, -- and instead of dwellingupon the political future that had so often been the subjectof his ambitious dreams, was imagining a future limited tothe enjoyments of home, in fear of awakening the enemy thathad so long slept, -- the noise of a carriage sounded in theyard, then he heard the steps of an aged person ascendingthe stairs, followed by tears and lamentations, such asservants always give vent to when they wish to appearinterested in their master's grief. He drew back the bolt ofhis door, and almost directly an old lady entered,unannounced, carrying her shawl on her arm, and her bonnetin her hand. The white hair was thrown back from her yellowforehead, and her eyes, already sunken by the furrows ofage, now almost disappeared beneath the eyelids swollen withgrief. "Oh, sir," she said; "oh, sir, what a misfortune! Ishall die of it; oh, yes, I shall certainly die of it!"

　　And then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burstinto a paroxysm of sobs. The servants, standing in thedoorway, not daring to approach nearer, were looking atNoirtier's old servant, who had heard the noise from hismaster's room, and run there also, remaining behind theothers. Villefort rose, and ran towards his mother-in-law,for it was she.

　　"Why, what can have happened?" he exclaimed, "what has thusdisturbed you? Is M. de Saint-Meran with you?"

　　"M. de Saint-Meran is dead," answered the old marchioness,without preface and without expression; she appeared to bestupefied. Villefort drew back, and clasping his handstogether, exclaimed -- "Dead! -- so suddenly?"

　　"A week ago," continued Madame de Saint-Meran, "we went outtogether in the carriage after dinner. M. de Saint-Meran hadbeen unwell for some days; still, the idea of seeing ourdear Valentine again inspired him with courage, andnotwithstanding his illness he would leave. At six leaguesfrom Marseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges heis accustomed to take, he fell into such a deep sleep, thatit appeared to me unnatural; still I hesitated to wake him,although I fancied that his face was flushed, and that theveins of his temples throbbed more violently than usual.However, as it became dark, and I could no longer see, Ifell asleep; I was soon aroused by a piercing shriek, asfrom a person suffering in his dreams, and he suddenly threwhis head back violently. I called the valet, I stopped thepostilion, I spoke to M. de Saint-Meran, I applied mysmelling-salts; but all was over, and I arrived at Aix bythe side of a corpse." Villefort stood with his mouth halfopen, quite stupefied.

　　"Of course you sent for a doctor?"

　　"Immediately; but, as I have told you, it was too late."

　　"Yes; but then he could tell of what complaint the poormarquis had died."

　　"Oh, yes, sir, he told me; it appears to have been anapoplectic stroke."

　　"And what did you do then?"

　　"M. de Saint-Meran had always expressed a desire, in casehis death happened during his absence from Paris, that hisbody might be brought to the family vault. I had him putinto a leaden coffin, and I am preceding him by a few days."

　　"Oh, my poor mother," said Villefort, "to have such dutiesto perform at your age after such a blow!"

　　"God has supported me through all; and then, my dearmarquis, he would certainly have done everything for me thatI performed for him. It is true that since I left him, Iseem to have lost my senses. I cannot cry; at my age theysay that we have no more tears, -- still I think that whenone is in trouble one should have the power of weeping.Where is Valentine. sir? It is on her account I am here; Iwish to see Valentine." Villefort thought it would beterrible to reply that Valentine was at a ball; so he onlysaid that she had gone out with her step-mother, and thatshe should be fetched. "This instant, sir -- this instant, Ibeseech you!" said the old lady. Villefort placed the arm ofMadame de Saint-Meran within his own, and conducted her tohis apartment. "Rest yourself, mother," he said.

　　The marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholdingthe man who so forcibly reminded her of her deeply-regrettedchild, who still lived for her in Valentine, she felttouched at the name of mother, and bursting into tears, shefell on her knees before an arm-chair, where she buried hervenerable head. Villefort left her to the care of the women,while old Barrois ran, half-scared, to his master; fornothing frightens old people so much as when death relaxesits vigilance over them for a moment in order to strike someother old person. Then, while Madame de Saint-Meran remainedon her knees, praying fervently, Villefort sent for a cab,and went himself to fetch his wife and daughter from Madamede Morcerf's. He was so pale when he appeared at the door ofthe ball-room, that Valentine ran to him, saying --

　　"Oh, father, some misfortune has happened!"

　　"Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine," said M. deVillefort.

　　"And grandpapa?" inquired the young girl, trembling withapprehension. M. de Villefort only replied by offering hisarm to his daughter. It was just in time, for Valentine'shead swam, and she staggered; Madame de Villefort instantlyhastened to her assistance, and aided her husband indragging her to the carriage, saying -- "What a singularevent! Who could have thought it? Ah, yes, it is indeedstrange!" And the wretched family departed, leaving a cloudof sadness hanging over the rest of the evening. At the footof the stairs, Valentine found Barrois awaiting her.

　　"M. Noirtier wishes to see you to-night, he said, in anundertone.

　　"Tell him I will come when I leave my dear grandmamma," shereplied, feeling, with true delicacy, that the person towhom she could be of the most service just then was Madamede Saint-Meran. Valentine found her grandmother in bed;silent caresses, heartwrung sobs, broken sighs, burningtears, were all that passed in this sad interview, whileMadame de Villefort, leaning on her husband's arm,maintained all outward forms of respect, at least towardsthe poor widow. She soon whispered to her husband, "I thinkit would be better for me to retire, with your permission,for the sight of me appears still to afflict yourmother-in-law." Madame de Saint-Meran heard her. "Yes, yes,"she said softly to Valentine, "let her leave; but do youstay." Madame de Villefort left, and Valentine remainedalone beside the bed, for the procureur, overcome withastonishment at the unexpected death, had followed his wife.Meanwhile, Barrois had returned for the first time to oldNoirtier, who having heard the noise in the house, had, aswe have said, sent his old servant to inquire the cause; onhis return, his quick intelligent eye interrogated themessenger. "Alas, sir," exclaimed Barrois, "a greatmisfortune has happened. Madame de Saint-Meran has arrived,and her husband is dead!"

　　M. de Saint-Meran and Noirtier had never been on strictterms of friendship; still, the death of one old man alwaysconsiderably affects another. Noirtier let his head fallupon his chest, apparently overwhelmed and thoughtful; thenhe closed one eye, in token of inquiry. "MademoiselleValentine?" Noirtier nodded his head. "She is at the ball,as you know, since she came to say good-by to you in fulldress." Noirtier again closed his left eye. "Do you wish tosee her?" Noirtier again made an affirmative sign. "Well,they have gone to fetch her, no doubt, from Madame deMorcerf's; I will await her return, and beg her to come uphere. Is that what you wish for?"

　　"Yes," replied the invalid.

　　Barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for Valentine,and informed her of her grandfather's wish. Consequently,Valentine came up to Noirtier, on leaving Madame deSaint-Meran, who in the midst of her grief had at lastyielded to fatigue and fallen into a feverish sleep. Withinreach of her hand they placed a small table upon which stooda bottle of orangeade, her usual beverage, and a glass.Then, as we have said, the young girl left the bedside tosee M. Noirtier. Valentine kissed the old man, who looked ather with such tenderness that her eyes again filled withtears, whose sources he thought must be exhausted. The oldgentleman continued to dwell upon her with the sameexpression. "Yes, yes," said Valentine, "you mean that Ihave yet a kind grandfather left, do you not." The old manintimated that such was his meaning. "Ah, yes, happily Ihave," replied Valentine. "Without that, what would becomeof me?"

　　It was one o'clock in the morning. Barrois, who wished to goto bed himself, observed that after such sad events everyone stood in need of rest. Noirtier would not say that theonly rest he needed was to see his child, but wished hergood-night, for grief and fatigue had made her appear quiteill. The next morning she found her grandmother in bed; thefever had not abated, on the contrary her eyes glistened andshe appeared to be suffering from violent nervousirritability. "Oh, dear grandmamma, are you worse?"exclaimed Valentine, perceiving all these signs ofagitation.

　　"No, my child, no," said Madame de Saint-Meran; "but I wasimpatiently waiting for your arrival, that I might send foryour father."

　　"My father?" inquired Valentine, uneasily.

　　"Yes, I wish to speak to him." Valentine durst not opposeher grandmother's wish, the cause of which she did not know,and an instant afterwards Villefort entered. "Sir," saidMadame de Saint-Meran, without using any circumlocution, andas if fearing she had no time to lose, "you wrote to meconcerning the marriage of this child?"

　　"Yes, madame," replied Villefort, "it is not only projectedbut arranged."

　　"Your intended son-in-law is named M. Franz d'Epinay?"

　　"Yes, madame."

　　"Is he not the son of General d'Epinay who was on our side,and who was assassinated some days before the usurperreturned from the Island of Elba?"

　　"The same."

　　"Does he not dislike the idea of marrying the granddaughterof a Jacobin?"

　　"Our civil dissensions are now happily extinguished,mother," said Villefort; "M. d'Epinay was quite a child whenhis father died, he knows very little of M. Noirtier, andwill meet him, if not with pleasure, at least withindifference."

　　"Is it a suitable match?"

　　"In every respect."

　　"And the young man?"

　　"Is regarded with universal esteem."

　　"You approve of him?"

　　"He is one of the most well-bred young men I know." Duringthe whole of this conversation Valentine had remainedsilent. "Well, sir," said Madame de Saint-Meran, after a fewminutes' reflection, "I must hasten the marriage, for I havebut a short time to live."

　　"You, madame?" "You, dear mamma?" exclaimed M. de Villefortand Valentine at the same time.

　　"I know what I am saying," continued the marchioness; "Imust hurry you, so that, as she has no mother, she may atleast have a grandmother to bless her marriage. I am allthat is left to her belonging to my poor Renee, whom youhave so soon forgotten, sir."

　　"Ah, madame," said Villefort, "you forget that I was obligedto give a mother to my child."

　　"A stepmother is never a mother, sir. But this is not to thepurpose, -- our business concerns Valentine, let us leavethe dead in peace."

　　All this was said with such exceeding rapidity, that therewas something in the conversation that seemed like thebeginning of delirium.

　　"It shall be as you wish, madame," said Villefort; "moreespecially since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soonas M. d'Epinay arrives in Paris" --

　　"My dear grandmother," interrupted Valentine, "considerdecorum -- the recent death. You would not have me marryunder such sad auspices?"

　　"My child," exclaimed the old lady sharply, "let us hearnone of the conventional objections that deter weak mindsfrom preparing for the future. I also was married at thedeath-bed of my mother, and certainly I have not been lesshappy on that account."

　　"Still that idea of death, madame," said Villefort.

　　"Still? -- Always! I tell you I am going to die -- do youunderstand? Well, before dying, I wish to see my son-in-law.I wish to tell him to make my child happy; I wish to read inhis eyes whether he intends to obey me; -- in fact, I willknow him -- I will!" continued the old lady, with a fearfulexpression, "that I may rise from the depths of my grave tofind him, if he should not fulfil his duty!"

　　"Madame," said Villefort, "you must lay aside these exaltedideas, which almost assume the appearance of madness. Thedead, once buried in their graves, rise no more."

　　"And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. This night Ihave had a fearful sleep. It seemed as though my soul werealready hovering over my body, my eyes, which I tried toopen, closed against my will, and what will appearimpossible above all to you, sir, I saw, with my eyes shut,in the spot where you are now standing, issuing from thatcorner where there is a door leading into Madame Villefort'sdressing-room -- I saw, I tell you, silently enter, a whitefigure." Valentine screamed. "It was the fever thatdisturbed you, madame," said Villefort.

　　"Doubt, if you please, but I am sure of what I say. I saw awhite figure, and as if to prevent my discrediting thetestimony of only one of my senses, I heard my glass removed-- the same which is there now on the table."

　　"Oh, dear mother, it was a dream."

　　"So little was it a dream, that I stretched my hand towardsthe bell; but when I did so, the shade disappeared; my maidthen entered with a light."

　　"But she saw no one?"

　　"Phantoms are visible to those only who ought to see them.It was the soul of my husband! -- Well, if my husband's soulcan come to me, why should not my soul reappear to guard mygranddaughter? the tie is even more direct, it seems to me."

　　"Oh, madame," said Villefort, deeply affected, in spite ofhimself, "do not yield to those gloomy thoughts; you willlong live with us, happy, loved, and honored, and we willmake you forget" --

　　"Never, never, never," said the marchioness. "when does M.d'Epinay return?"

　　"We expect him every moment."

　　"It is well. As soon as he arrives inform me. We must beexpeditious. And then I also wish to see a notary, that Imay be assured that all our property returns to Valentine."

　　"Ah, grandmamma," murmured Valentine, pressing her lips onthe burning brow, "do you wish to kill me? Oh, how feverishyou are; we must not send for a notary, but for a doctor."

　　"A doctor?" said she, shrugging her shoulders, "I am notill; I am thirsty -- that is all."

　　"What are you drinking, dear grandmamma?"

　　"The same as usual, my dear, my glass is there on the table-- give it to me, Valentine." Valentine poured the orangeadeinto a glass and gave it to her grandmother with a certaindegree of dread, for it was the same glass she fancied thathad been touched by the spectre. The marchioness drained theglass at a single draught, and then turned on her pillow,repeating, -- "The notary, the notary!"

　　M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herselfat the bedside of her grandmother. The poor child appearedherself to require the doctor she had recommended to heraged relative. A bright spot burned in either cheek, herrespiration was short and difficult, and her pulse beat withfeverish excitement. She was thinking of the despair ofMaximilian, when he should be informed that Madame deSaint-Meran, instead of being an ally, was unconsciouslyacting as his enemy. More than once she thought of revealingall to her grandmother, and she would not have hesitated amoment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named Albert deMorcerf or Raoul de Chateau-Renaud; but Morrel was ofplebeian extraction, and Valentine knew how the haughtyMarquise de Saint-Meran despised all who were not noble. Hersecret had each time been repressed when she was about toreveal it, by the sad conviction that it would be useless todo so; for, were it once discovered by her father andmother, all would be lost. Two hours passed thus; Madame deSaint-Meran was in a feverish sleep, and the notary hadarrived. Though his coming was announced in a very low tone,Madame de Saint-Meran arose from her pillow. "The notary!"she exclaimed, "let him come in."

　　The notary, who was at the door, immediately entered. "Go,Valentine," said Madame de Saint-Meran, "and leave me withthis gentleman."

　　"But, grandmamma" --

　　"Leave me -- go!" The young girl kissed her grandmother, andleft with her handkerchief to her eyes; at the door shefound the valet de chambre, who told her that the doctor waswaiting in the dining-room. Valentine instantly ran down.The doctor was a friend of the family, and at the same timeone of the cleverest men of the day, and very fond ofValentine, whose birth he had witnessed. He had himself adaughter about her age, but whose life was one continuedsource of anxiety and fear to him from her mother havingbeen consumptive.

　　"Oh," said Valentine, "we have been waiting for you withsuch impatience, dear M. d'Avrigny. But, first of all, howare Madeleine and Antoinette?" Madeleine was the daughter ofM. d'Avrigny, and Antoinette his niece. M. d'Avrigny smiledsadly. "Antoinette is very well," he said, "and Madeleinetolerably so. But you sent for me, my dear child. It is notyour father or Madame de Villefort who is ill. As for you,although we doctors cannot divest our patients of nerves, Ifancy you have no further need of me than to recommend younot to allow your imagination to take too wide a field."Valentine colored. M. d'Avrigny carried the science ofdivination almost to a miraculous extent, for he was one ofthe physicians who always work upon the body through themind. "No," she replied, "it is for my poor grandmother. Youknow the calamity that has happened to us, do you not?"

　　"I know nothing." said M. d'Avrigny.

　　"Alas," said Valentine, restraining her tears, "mygrandfather is dead."

　　"M. de Saint-Meran?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Suddenly?"

　　"From an apoplectic stroke."

　　"An apoplectic stroke?" repeated the doctor.

　　"Yes, and my poor grandmother fancies that her husband, whomshe never left, has called her, and that she must go andjoin him. Oh, M. d'Avrigny, I beseech you, do something forher!"

　　"Where is she?"

　　"In her room with the notary."

　　"And M. Noirtier?"

　　"Just as he was, his mind perfectly clear, but the sameincapability of moving or speaking."

　　"And the same love for you -- eh, my dear child?"

　　"Yes," said Valentine, "he was very fond of me."

　　"Who does not love you?" Valentine smiled sadly. "What areyour grandmother's symptoms?"

　　"An extreme nervous excitement and a strangely agitatedsleep; she fancied this morning in her sleep that her soulwas hovering above her body, which she at the same timewatched. It must have been delirium; she fancies, too, thatshe saw a phantom enter her chamber and even heard the noiseit made on touching her glass."

　　"It is singular," said the doctor; "I was not aware thatMadame de Saint-Meran was subject to such hallucinations."

　　"It is the first time I ever saw her in this condition,"said Valentine; "and this morning she frightened me so thatI thought her mad; and my father, who you know is astrong-minded man, himself appeared deeply impressed."

　　"We will go and see," said the doctor; "what you tell meseems very strange." The notary here descended, andValentine was informed that her grandmother was alone. "Goupstairs," she said to the doctor.

　　"And you?"

　　"Oh, I dare not -- she forbade my sending for you; and, asyou say, I am myself agitated, feverish and out of sorts. Iwill go and take a turn in the garden to recover myself."The doctor pressed Valentine's hand, and while he visitedher grandmother, she descended the steps. We need not saywhich portion of the garden was her favorite walk. Afterremaining for a short time in the parterre surrounding thehouse, and gathering a rose to place in her waist or hair,she turned into the dark avenue which led to the bench; thenfrom the bench she went to the gate. As usual, Valentinestrolled for a short time among her flowers, but withoutgathering them. The mourning in her heart forbade herassuming this simple ornament, though she had not yet hadtime to put on the outward semblance of woe. She then turnedtowards the avenue. As she advanced she fancied she heard avoice speaking her name. She stopped astonished, then thevoice reached her ear more distinctly, and she recognized itto be that of Maximilian.

　　Chapter 73The Promise.

　　It was, indeed, Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a wretchedexistence since the previous day. With the instinct peculiarto lovers he had anticipated after the return of Madame deSaint-Meran and the death of the marquis, that somethingwould occur at M. de Villefort's in connection with hisattachment for Valentine. His presentiments were realized,as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings had goaded himpale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.Valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow andanxiety, and as it was not his accustomed hour for visitingher, she had gone to the spot simply by accident or perhapsthrough sympathy. Morrel called her, and she ran to thegate. "You here at this hour?" said she. "Yes, my poorgirl," replied Morrel; "I come to bring and to hear badtidings."

　　"This is, indeed, a house of mourning," said Valentine;"speak, Maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems alreadyfull."

　　"Dear Valentine," said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal hisown emotion, "listen, I entreat you; what I am about to sayis very serious. When are you to be married?"

　　"I will tell you all," said Valentine; "from you I havenothing to conceal. This morning the subject was introduced,and my dear grandmother, on whom I depended as my onlysupport, not only declared herself favorable to it, but isso anxious for it, that they only await the arrival of M.d'Epinay, and the following day the contract will besigned." A deep sigh escaped the young man, who gazed longand mournfully at her he loved. "Alas," replied he, "it isdreadful thus to hear my condemnation from your own lips.The sentence is passed, and, in a few hours, will beexecuted; it must be so, and I will not endeavor to preventit. But, since you say nothing remains but for M. d'Epinayto arrive that the contract may be signed, and the followingday you will be his, to-morrow you will be engaged to M.d'Epinay, for he came this morning to Paris." Valentineuttered a cry.

　　"I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since," saidMorrel; "we were speaking, he of the sorrow your family hadexperienced, and I of your grief, when a carriage rolledinto the court-yard. Never, till then, had I placed anyconfidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help believingthem, Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered;soon I heard steps on the staircase, which terrified me asmuch as the footsteps of the commander did Don Juan. Thedoor at last opened; Albert de Morcerf entered first, and Ibegan to hope my fears were vain, when, after him, anotheryoung man advanced, and the count exclaimed -- `Ah, here isthe Baron Franz d'Epinay!' I summoned all my strength andcourage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled,but certainly I smiled; and five minutes after I left,without having heard one word that had passed."

　　"Poor Maximilian!" murmured Valentine.

　　"Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me.And remember my life depends on your answer. What do youintend doing?" Valentine held down her head; she wasoverwhelmed.

　　"Listen," said Morrel; "it is not the first time you havecontemplated our present position, which is a serious andurgent one; I do not think it is a moment to give way touseless sorrow; leave that for those who like to suffer attheir leisure and indulge their grief in secret. There aresuch in the world, and God will doubtless reward them inheaven for their resignation on earth, but those who mean tocontend must not lose one precious moment, but must returnimmediately the blow which fortune strikes. Do you intend tostruggle against our ill-fortune? Tell me, Valentine for itis that I came to know."

　　Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. Theidea of resisting her father, her grandmother, and all thefamily, had never occurred to her. "What do you say,Maximilian?" asked Valentine. "What do you mean by astruggle? Oh, it would be a sacrilege. What? I resist myfather's order, and my dying grandmother's wish?Impossible!" Morrel started. "You are too noble not tounderstand me, and you understand me so well that youalready yield, dear Maximilian. No, no; I shall need all mystrength to struggle with myself and support my grief insecret, as you say. But to grieve my father -- to disturb mygrandmother's last moments -- never!"

　　"You are right," said Morrel, calmly.

　　"In what a tone you speak!" cried Valentine.

　　"I speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle."

　　"Mademoiselle," cried Valentine; "mademoiselle! Oh, selfishman, -- he sees me in despair, and pretends he cannotunderstand me!"

　　"You mistake -- I understand you perfectly. You will notoppose M. Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness,and to-morrow you will sign the contract which will bind youto your husband."

　　"But, mon Dieu, tell me, how can I do otherwise?"

　　"Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judgein such a case; my selfishness will blind me," repliedMorrel, whose low voice and clinched hands announced hisgrowing desperation.

　　"What would you have proposed, Maximilian, had you found mewilling to accede?"

　　"It is not for me to say."

　　"You are wrong; you must advise me what to do."

　　"Do you seriously ask my advice, Valentine?"

　　"Certainly, dear Maximilian, for if it is good, I willfollow it; you know my devotion to you."

　　"Valentine," said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, "giveme your hand in token of forgiveness of my anger; my sensesare confused, and during the last hour the most extravagantthoughts have passed through my brain. Oh, if you refuse myadvice" --

　　"What do you advise?" said Valentine, raising her eyes toheaven and sighing. "I am free," replied Maximilian, "andrich enough to support you. I swear to make you my lawfulwife before my lips even shall have approached yourforehead."

　　"You make me tremble!" said the young girl.

　　"Follow me," said Morrel; "I will take you to my sister, whois worthy also to be yours. We will embark for Algiers, forEngland, for America, or, if your prefer it, retire to thecountry and only return to Paris when our friends havereconciled your family." Valentine shook her head. "I fearedit, Maximilian," said she; "it is the counsel of a madman,and I should be more mad than you, did I not stop you atonce with the word `Impossible, impossible!'"

　　"You will then submit to what fate decrees for you withouteven attempting to contend with it?" said Morrelsorrowfully. "Yes, -- if I die!"

　　"Well, Valentine," resumed Maximilian, "I can only say againthat you are right. Truly, it is I who am mad, and you proveto me that passion blinds the most well-meaning. Iappreciate your calm reasoning. It is then understood thatto-morrow you will be irrevocably promised to M. Franzd'Epinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented toheighten the effect of a comedy called the signature of thecontract, but your own will?"

　　"Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian," said Valentine,"again you plunge the dagger into the wound! What would youdo, tell me, if your sister listened to such a proposition?"

　　"Mademoiselle," replied Morrel with a bitter smile, "I amselfish -- you have already said so -- and as a selfish manI think not of what others would do in my situation, but ofwhat I intend doing myself. I think only that I have knownyou not a whole year. From the day I first saw you, all myhopes of happiness have been in securing your affection. Oneday you acknowledged that you loved me, and since that daymy hope of future happiness has rested on obtaining you, forto gain you would be life to me. Now, I think no more; I sayonly that fortune has turned against me -- I had thought togain heaven, and now I have lost it. It is an every-dayoccurrence for a gambler to lose not only what he possessesbut also what he has not." Morrel pronounced these wordswith perfect calmness; Valentine looked at him a moment withher large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to let Morreldiscover the grief which struggled in her heart. "But, in aword, what are you going to do?" asked she.

　　"I am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you,mademoiselle, solemnly assuring you that I wish your lifemay be so calm, so happy, and so fully occupied, that theremay be no place for me even in your memory."

　　"Oh!" murmured Valentine.

　　"Adieu, Valentine, adieu!" said Morrel, bowing.

　　"Where are you going?" cried the young girl, extending herhand through the opening, and seizing Maximilian by hiscoat, for she understood from her own agitated feelings thather lover's calmness could not be real; "where are yougoing?"

　　"I am going, that I may not bring fresh trouble into yourfamily: and to set an example which every honest and devotedman, situated as I am, may follow."

　　"Before you leave me, tell me what you are going to do,Maximilian." The young man smiled sorrowfully. "Speak,speak!" said Valentine; "I entreat you."

　　"Has your resolution changed, Valentine?"

　　"It cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!" criedthe young girl. "Then adieu, Valentine!" Valentine shook thegate with a strength of which she could not have beensupposed to be possessed, as Morrel was going away, andpassing both her hands through the opening, she clasped andwrung them. "I must know what you mean to do!" said she."Where are you going?"

　　"Oh, fear not," said Maximilian, stopping at a shortdistance, "I do not intend to render another man responsiblefor the rigorous fate reserved for me. Another mightthreaten to seek M. Franz, to provoke him, and to fight withhim; all that would be folly. What has M. Franz to do withit? He saw me this morning for the first time, and hasalready forgotten he has seen me. He did not even know Iexisted when it was arranged by your two families that youshould be united. I have no enmity against M. Franz, andpromise you the punishment shall not fall on him."

　　"On whom, then! -- on me?"

　　"On you? Valentine! Oh, heaven forbid! Woman is sacred; thewoman one loves is holy."

　　"On yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?"

　　"I am the only guilty person, am I not?' said Maximilian.

　　"Maximilian!" said Valentine, "Maximilian, come back, Ientreat you!" He drew near with his sweet smile, and but forhis paleness one might have thought him in his usual happymood. "Listen, my dear, my adored Valentine," said he in hismelodious and grave tone; "those who, like us, have neverhad a thought for which we need blush before the world, suchmay read each other's hearts. I never was romantic, and amno melancholy hero. I imitate neither Manfred nor Anthony;but without words, protestations, or vows, my life hasentwined itself with yours; you leave me, and you are rightin doing so, -- I repeat it, you are right; but in losingyou, I lose my life.

　　"The moment you leave me, Valentine, I am alone in theworld. My sister is happily married; her husband is only mybrother-in-law, that is, a man whom the ties of social lifealone attach to me; no one then longer needs my uselesslife. This is what I shall do; I will wait until the verymoment you are married, for I will not lose the shadow ofone of those unexpected chances which are sometimes reservedfor us, since M. Franz may, after all, die before that time,a thunderbolt may fall even on the altar as you approach it,-- nothing appears impossible to one condemned to die, andmiracles appear quite reasonable when his escape from deathis concerned. I will, then, wait until the last moment, andwhen my misery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, I willwrite a confidential letter to my brother-in-law, another tothe prefect of police, to acquaint them with my intention,and at the corner of some wood, on the brink of some abyss,on the bank of some river, I will put an end to myexistence, as certainly as I am the son of the most honestman who ever lived in France."

　　Valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold ofthe gate, her arms fell by her side, and two large tearsrolled down her cheeks. The young man stood before her,sorrowful and resolute. "Oh, for pity's sake," said she,"you will live, will you not?"

　　"No, on my honor," said Maximilian; "but that will notaffect you. You have done your duty, and your consciencewill be at rest." Valentine fell on her knees, and pressedher almost bursting heart. "Maximilian," said she,"Maximilian, my friend, my brother on earth, my true husbandin heaven, I entreat you, do as I do, live in suffering;perhaps we may one day be united."

　　"Adieu, Valentine," repeated Morrel.

　　"My God," said Valentine, raising both her hands to heavenwith a sublime expression, "I have done my utmost to remaina submissive daughter; I have begged, entreated, implored;he has regarded neither my prayers, my entreaties, nor mytears. It is done," cried she, willing away her tears, andresuming her firmness, "I am resolved not to die of remorse,but rather of shame. Live, Maximilian, and I will be yours.Say when shall it be? Speak, command, I will obey." Morrel,who had already gone some few steps away, again returned,and pale with joy extended both hands towards Valentinethrough the opening. "Valentine," said he, "dear Valentine,you must not speak thus -- rather let me die. Why should Iobtain you by violence, if our love is mutual? Is it frommere humanity you bid me live? I would then rather die."

　　"Truly," murmured Valentine, "who on this earth cares forme, if he does not? Who has consoled me in my sorrow but he?On whom do my hopes rest? On whom does my bleeding heartrepose? On him, on him, always on him! Yes, you are right,Maximilian, I will follow you. I will leave the paternalhome, I will give up all. Oh, ungrateful girl that I am,"cried Valentine, sobbing, "I will give up all, even my dearold grandfather, whom I had nearly forgotten."

　　"No," said Maximilian, "you shall not leave him. M. Noirtierhas evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me. Well,before you leave, tell him all; his consent would be yourjustification in God's sight. As soon as we are married, heshall come and live with us, instead of one child, he shallhave two. You have told me how you talk to him and how heanswers you; I shall very soon learn that language by signs,Valentine, and I promise you solemnly, that instead ofdespair, it is happiness that awaits us."

　　"Oh, see, Maximilian, see the power you have over me, youalmost make me believe you; and yet, what you tell me ismadness, for my father will curse me -- he is inflexible --he will never pardon me. Now listen to me, Maximilian; if byartifice, by entreaty, by accident -- in short, if by anymeans I can delay this marriage, will you wait?"

　　"Yes, I promise you, as faithfully as you have promised methat this horrible marriage shall not take place, and thatif you are dragged before a magistrate or a priest, you willrefuse."

　　"I promise you by all that is most sacred to me in theworld, namely, by my mother."

　　"We will wait, then," said Morrel.

　　"Yes, we will wait," replied Valentine, who revived at thesewords; "there are so many things which may save unhappybeings such as we are."

　　"I rely on you, Valentine," said Morrel; "all you do will bewell done; only if they disregard your prayers, if yourfather and Madame de Saint-Meran insist that M. d'Epinayshould be called to-morrow to sign the contract" --

　　"Then you have my promise, Maximilian."

　　"Instead of signing" --

　　"I will go to you, and we will fly; but from this momentuntil then, let us not tempt providence, let us not see eachother. It is a miracle, it is a providence that we have notbeen discovered. If we were surprised, if it were known thatwe met thus, we should have no further resource."

　　"You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?"

　　"From the notary, M. Deschamps."

　　"I know him."

　　"And for myself -- I will write to you, depend on me. Idread this marriage, Maximilian, as much as you."

　　"Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough.When once I know the hour, I will hasten to this spot, youcan easily get over this fence with my assistance, acarriage will await us at the gate, in which you willaccompany me to my sister's; there living, retired ormingling in society, as you wish, we shall be enabled to useour power to resist oppression, and not suffer ourselves tobe put to death like sheep, which only defend themselves bysighs."

　　"Yes," said Valentine, "I will now acknowledge you areright, Maximilian; and now are you satisfied with yourbetrothal?" said the young girl sorrowfully.

　　"My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of mysatisfaction." Valentine had approached, or rather, hadplaced her lips so near the fence, that they nearly touchedthose of Morrel, which were pressed against the other sideof the cold and inexorable barrier. "Adieu, then, till wemeet again," said Valentine, tearing herself away. "I shallhear from you?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!" The sound of a kiss washeard, and Valentine fled through the avenue. Morrellistened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing thebranches, and of her footstep on the gravel, then raised hiseyes with an ineffable smile of thankfulness to heaven forbeing permitted to be thus loved, and then also disappeared.The young man returned home and waited all the evening andall the next day without getting any message. It was only onthe following day, at about ten o'clock in the morning, ashe was starting to call on M. Deschamps, the notary, that hereceived from the postman a small billet, which he knew tobe from Valentine, although he had not before seen herwriting. It was to this effect: --

　　Tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed me nothing.Yesterday, for two hours, I was at the church ofSaint-Phillippe du Roule, and for two hours I prayed mostfervently. Heaven is as inflexible as man, and the signatureof the contract is fixed for this evening at nine o'clock. Ihave but one promise and but one heart to give; that promiseis pledged to you, that heart is also yours. This evening,then, at a quarter to nine at the gate.

　　Your betrothed,

　　Valentine de Villefort.

　　P.S. -- My poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterdayher fever amounted to delirium; to-day her delirium isalmost madness. You will be very kind to me, will you not,Morrel, to make me forget my sorrow in leaving her thus? Ithink it is kept a secret from grandpapa Noirtier, that thecontract is to be signed this evening.

　　Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news thatthe contract was to be signed that evening. Then he went tocall on Monte Cristo and heard still more. Franz had been toannounce the ceremony, and Madame de Villefort had alsowritten to beg the count to excuse her not inviting him; thedeath of M. de Saint-Meran and the dangerous illness of hiswidow would cast a gloom over the meeting which she wouldregret should be shared by the count whom she wished everyhappiness. The day before Franz had been presented to Madamede Saint-Meran, who had left her bed to receive him, but hadbeen obliged to return to it immediately after. It is easyto suppose that Morrel's agitation would not escape thecount's penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionatethan ever, -- indeed, his manner was so kind that severaltimes Morrel was on the point of telling him all. But herecalled the promise he had made to Valentine, and kept hissecret.

　　The young man read Valentine's letter twenty times in thecourse of the day. It was her first, and on what anoccasion! Each time he read it he renewed his vow to makeher happy. How great is the power of a woman who has made socourageous a resolution! What devotion does she deserve fromhim for whom she has sacrificed everything! How ought shereally to be supremely loved! She becomes at once a queenand a wife, and it is impossible to thank and love hersufficiently. Morrel longed intensely for the moment when heshould hear Valentine say, "Here I am, Maximilian; come andhelp me." He had arranged everything for her escape; twoladders were hidden in the clover-field; a cabriolet wasordered for Maximilian alone, without a servant, withoutlights; at the turning of the first street they would lightthe lamps, as it would be foolish to attract the notice ofthe police by too many precautions. Occasionally heshuddered; he thought of the moment when, from the top ofthat wall, he should protect the descent of his dearValentine, pressing in his arms for the first time her ofwhom he had yet only kissed the delicate hand.

　　When the afternoon arrived and he felt that the hour wasdrawing near, he wished for solitude, his agitation wasextreme; a simple question from a friend would haveirritated him. He shut himself in his room, and tried toread, but his eye glanced over the page withoutunderstanding a word, and he threw away the book, and forthe second time sat down to sketch his plan, the ladders andthe fence. At length the hour drew near. Never did a mandeeply in love allow the clocks to go on peacefully. Morreltormented his so effectually that they struck eight athalf-past six. He then said, "It is time to start; thesignature was indeed fixed to take place at nine o'clock,but perhaps Valentine will not wait for that. Consequently,Morrel, having left the Rue Meslay at half-past eight by histimepiece, entered the clover-field while the clock ofSaint-Phillippe du Roule was striking eight. The horse andcabriolet were concealed behind a small ruin, where Morrelhad often waited.

　　The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the gardenassumed a deeper hue. Then Morrel came out from hishiding-place with a beating heart, and looked through thesmall opening in the gate; there was yet no one to be seen.The clock struck half-past eight, and still anotherhalf-hour was passed in waiting, while Morrel walked to andfro, and gazed more and more frequently through the opening.The garden became darker still, but in the darkness helooked in vain for the white dress, and in the silence hevainly listened for the sound of footsteps. The house, whichwas discernible through the trees, remained in darkness, andgave no indication that so important an event as thesignature of a marriage-contract was going on. Morrel lookedat his watch, which wanted a quarter to ten; but soon thesame clock he had already heard strike two or three timesrectified the error by striking half-past nine.

　　This was already half an hour past the time Valentine hadfixed. It was a terrible moment for the young man. Theslightest rustling of the foliage, the least whistling ofthe wind, attracted his attention, and drew the perspirationto his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his ladder, and, notto lose a moment, placed his foot on the first step. Amidstall these alternations of hope and fear, the clock struckten. "It is impossible," said Maximilian, "that the signingof a contract should occupy so long a time withoutunexpected interruptions. I have weighed all the chances,calculated the time required for all the forms; somethingmust have happened." And then he walked rapidly to and fro,and pressed his burning forehead against the fence. HadValentine fainted? or had she been discovered and stopped inher flight? These were the only obstacles which appearedpossible to the young man.

　　The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting toescape, and that she had fainted in one of the paths, wasthe one that most impressed itself upon his mind. "In thatcase," said he, "I should lose her, and by my own fault." Hedwelt on this idea for a moment, then it appeared reality.He even thought he could perceive something on the ground ata distance; he ventured to call, and it seemed to him thatthe wind wafted back an almost inarticulate sigh. At lastthe half-hour struck. It was impossible to wait longer, histemples throbbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; hepassed one leg over the wall, and in a moment leaped down onthe other side. He was on Villefort's premises -- hadarrived there by scaling the wall. What might be theconsequences? However, he had not ventured thus far to drawback. He followed a short distance close under the wall,then crossed a path, hid entered a clump of trees. In amoment he had passed through them, and could see the housedistinctly. Then Morrel saw that he had been right inbelieving that the house was not illuminated. Instead oflights at every window, as is customary on days of ceremony,he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a cloud,which at that moment obscured the moon's feeble light. Alight moved rapidly from time to time past three windows ofthe second floor. These three windows were in Madame deSaint-Meran's room. Another remained motionless behind somered curtains which were in Madame de Villefort's bedroom.Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in order to followValentine in thought at every hour in the day, had he madeher describe the whole house, that without having seen it heknew it all.

　　This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more thanValentine's absence had done. Almost mad with grief, anddetermined to venture everything in order to see Valentineonce more, and be certain of the misfortune he feared,Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and was goingto pass as quickly as possible through the flower-garden,when the sound of a voice, still at some distance, but whichwas borne upon the wind, reached him.

　　At this sound, as he was already partially exposed to view,he stepped back and concealed himself completely, remainingperfectly motionless. He had formed his resolution. If itwas Valentine alone, he would speak as she passed; if shewas accompanied, and he could not speak, still he should seeher, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, hewould listen to their conversation, and might understandsomething of this hitherto incomprehensible mystery. Themoon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which hadconcealed it, and Morrel saw Villefort come out upon thesteps, followed by a gentleman in black. They descended, andadvanced towards the clump of trees, and Morrel soonrecognized the other gentleman as Doctor d'Avrigny.

　　The young man, seeing them approach, drew back mechanically,until he found himself stopped by a sycamore-tree in thecentre of the clump; there he was compelled to remain. Soonthe two gentlemen stopped also.

　　"Ah, my dear doctor," said the procureur, "heaven declaresitself against my house! What a dreadful death -- what ablow! Seek not to console me; alas, nothing can alleviate sogreat a sorrow -- the wound is too deep and too fresh! Dead,dead!" The cold sweat sprang to the young man's brow, andhis teeth chattered. Who could be dead in that house, whichVillefort himself had called accursed? "My dear M. deVillefort," replied the doctor, with a tone which redoubledthe terror of the young man, "I have not led you here toconsole you; on the contrary" --

　　"What can you mean?" asked the procureur, alarmed.

　　"I mean that behind the misfortune which has just happenedto you, there is another, perhaps, still greater."

　　"Can it be possible?" murmured Villefort, clasping hishands. "What are you going to tell me?"

　　"Are we quite alone, my friend?"

　　"Yes, quite; but why all these precautions?"

　　"Because I have a terrible secret to communicate to you,"said the doctor. "Let us sit down."

　　Villefort fell, rather than seated himself The doctor stoodbefore him, with one hand placed on his shoulder. Morrel,horrified, supported his head with one hand, and with theother pressed his heart, lest its beatings should be heard."Dead, dead!" repeated he within himself; and he felt as ifhe were also dying.

　　"Speak, doctor -- I am listening," said Villefort; "strike-- I am prepared for everything!"

　　"Madame de Saint-Meran was, doubtless, advancing in years,but she enjoyed excellent health." Morrel began again tobreathe freely, which he had not done during the last tenminutes.

　　"Grief has consumed her," said Villefort -- "yes, grief,doctor! After living forty years with the marquis" --

　　"It is not grief, my dear Villefort," said the doctor;"grief may kill, although it rarely does, and never in aday, never in an hour, never in ten minutes." Villefort

　　answered nothing, he simply raised his head, which had beencast down before, and looked at the doctor with amazement.

　　"Were you present during the last struggle?" asked M.d'Avrigny.

　　"I was," replied the procureur; "you begged me not toleave."

　　"Did you notice the symptoms of the disease to which Madamede Saint-Meran has fallen a victim?"

　　"I did. Madame de Saint-Meran had three successive attacks,at intervals of some minutes, each one more serious than theformer. When you arrived, Madame de Saint-Meran had alreadybeen panting for breath some minutes; she then had a fit,which I took to be simply a nervous attack, and it was onlywhen I saw her raise herself in the bed, and her limbs andneck appear stiffened, that I became really alarmed. Then Iunderstood from your countenance there was more to fear thanI had thought. This crisis past, I endeavored to catch youreye, but could not. You held her hand -- you were feelingher pulse -- and the second fit came on before you hadturned towards me. This was more terrible than the first;the same nervous movements were repeated, and the mouthcontracted and turned purple."

　　"And at the third she expired."

　　"At the end of the first attack I discovered symptoms oftetanus; you confirmed my opinion."

　　"Yes, before others," replied the doctor; "but now we arealone" --

　　"What are you going to say? Oh, spare me!"

　　"That the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetablesubstances are the same." M. de Villefort started from hisseat, then in a moment fell down again, silent andmotionless. Morrel knew not if he were dreaming or awake."Listen, said the doctor; "I know the full importance of thestatement I have just made, and the disposition of the manto whom I have made it."

　　"Do you speak to me as a magistrate or as a friend?" askedVillefort.

　　"As a friend, and only as a friend, at this moment. Thesimilarity in the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning byvegetable substances is so great, that were I obliged toaffirm by oath what I have now stated, I should hesitate; Itherefore repeat to you, I speak not to a magistrate, but toa friend. And to that friend I say. `During thethree-quarters of an hour that the struggle continued, Iwatched the convulsions and the death of Madame deSaint-Meran, and am thoroughly convinced that not only didher death proceed from poison, but I could also specify thepoison.'"

　　"Can it be possible?"

　　"The symptoms are marked, do you see? -- sleep broken bynervous spasms, excitation of the brain, torpor of the nervecentres. Madame de Saint-Meran succumbed to a powerful doseof brucine or of strychnine, which by some mistake, perhaps,has been given to her." Villefort seized the doctor's hand."Oh, it is impossible," said he, "I must be dreaming! It isfrightful to hear such things from such a man as you! Tellme, I entreat you, my dear doctor, that you may bedeceived."

　　"Doubtless I may, but" --

　　"But?"

　　"But I do not think so."

　　"Have pity on me doctor! So many dreadful things havehappened to me lately that I am on the verge of madness."

　　"Has any one besides me seen Madame de Saint-Meran?"

　　"No."

　　"Has anything been sent for from a chemist's that I have notexamined?"

　　"Nothing."

　　"Had Madame de Saint-Meran any enemies?"

　　"Not to my knowledge."

　　"Would her death affect any one's interest?"

　　"It could not indeed, my daughter is her only heiress --Valentine alone. Oh, if such a thought could present itself,I would stab myself to punish my heart for having for oneinstant harbored it."

　　"Indeed, my dear friend," said M. d'Avrigny, "I would notaccuse any one; I speak only of an accident, you understand,-- of a mistake, -- but whether accident or mistake, thefact is there; it is on my conscience and compels me tospeak aloud to you. Make inquiry."

　　"Of whom? -- how? -- of what?"

　　"May not Barrois, the old servant, have made a mistake, andhave given Madame de Saint-Meran a dose prepared for hismaster?"

　　"For my father?"

　　"Yes."

　　"But how could a dose prepared for M. Noirtier poison Madamede Saint-Meran?"

　　"Nothing is more simple. You know poisons become remedies incertain diseases, of which paralysis is one. For instance,having tried every other remedy to restore movement andspeech to M. Noirtier, I resolved to try one last means, andfor three months I have been giving him brucine; so that inthe last dose I ordered for him there were six grains. Thisquantity, which is perfectly safe to administer to theparalyzed frame of M. Noirtier, which has become graduallyaccustomed to it, would be sufficient to kill anotherperson."

　　"My dear doctor, there is no communication between M.Noirtier's apartment and that of Madame de Saint-Meran, andBarrois never entered my mother-in-law's room. In short,doctor although I know you to be the most conscientious manin the world, and although I place the utmost reliance inyou, I want, notwithstanding my conviction, to believe thisaxiom, errare humanum est."

　　"Is there one of my brethren in whom you have equalconfidence with myself?"

　　"Why do you ask me that? -- what do you wish?"

　　"Send for him; I will tell him what I have seen, and we willconsult together, and examine the body."

　　"And you will find traces of poison?"

　　"No, I did not say of poison, but we can prove what was thestate of the body; we shall discover the cause of her suddendeath, and we shall say, `Dear Villefort, if this thing hasbeen caused by negligence, watch over your servants; if fromhatred, watch your enemies.'"

　　"What do you propose to me, d'Avrigny?" said Villefort indespair; "so soon as another is admitted into our secret, aninquest will become necessary; and an inquest in my house --impossible! Still," continued the procureur, looking at thedoctor with uneasiness, "if you wish it -- if you demand it,why then it shall be done. But, doctor, you see me alreadyso grieved -- how can I introduce into my house so muchscandal, after so much sorrow? My wife and my daughter woulddie of it! And I, doctor -- you know a man does not arriveat the post I occupy -- one has not been king's attorneytwenty-five years without having amassed a tolerable numberof enemies; mine are numerous. Let this affair be talked of,it will be a triumph for them, which will make them rejoice,and cover me with shame. Pardon me, doctor, these worldlyideas; were you a priest I should not dare tell you that,but you are a man, and you know mankind. Doctor, pray recallyour words; you have said nothing, have you?"

　　"My dear M. de Villefort," replied the doctor, "my firstduty is to humanity. I would have saved Madame deSaint-Meran, if science could have done it; but she is deadand my duty regards the living. Let us bury this terriblesecret in the deepest recesses of our hearts; I am willing,if any one should suspect this, that my silence on thesubject should be imputed to my ignorance. Meanwhile, sir,watch always -- watch carefully, for perhaps the evil maynot stop here. And when you have found the culprit, if youfind him, I will say to you, `You are a magistrate, do asyou will!'"

　　"I thank you, doctor," said Villefort with indescribablejoy; "I never had a better friend than you." And, as if hefeared Doctor d'Avrigny would recall his promise, he hurriedhim towards the house.

　　When they were gone, Morrel ventured out from under thetrees, and the moon shone upon his face, which was so paleit might have been taken for that of a ghost. "I ammanifestly protected in a most wonderful, but most terriblemanner," said he; "but Valentine, poor girl, how will shebear so much sorrow?"

　　As he thought thus, he looked alternately at the window withred curtains and the three windows with white curtains. Thelight had almost disappeared from the former; doubtlessMadame de Villefort had just put out her lamp, and thenightlamp alone reflected its dull light on the window. Atthe extremity of the building, on the contrary, he saw oneof the three windows open. A wax-light placed on themantle-piece threw some of its pale rays without, and ashadow was seen for one moment on the balcony. Morrelshuddered; he thought he heard a sob.

　　It cannot be wondered at that his mind, generally socourageous, but now disturbed by the two strongest humanpassions, love and fear, was weakened even to the indulgenceof superstitious thoughts. Although it was impossible thatValentine should see him, hidden as he was, he thought heheard the shadow at the window call him; his disturbed mindtold him so. This double error became an irresistiblereality, and by one of the incomprehensible transports ofyouth, he bounded from his hiding-place, and with twostrides, at the risk of being seen, at the risk of alarmingValentine, at the risk of being discovered by someexclamation which might escape the young girl, he crossedthe flower-garden, which by the light of the moon resembleda large white lake, and having passed the rows oforange-trees which extended in front of the house, hereached the step, ran quickly up and pushed the door, whichopened without offering any resistance. Valentine had notseen him. Her eyes, raised towards heaven, were watching asilvery cloud gliding over the azure, its form that of ashadow mounting towards heaven. Her poetic and excited mindpictured it as the soul of her grandmother.

　　Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found thestaircase, which, being carpeted, prevented his approachbeing heard, and he had regained that degree of confidencethat the presence of M. de Villefort even would not havealarmed him. He was quite prepared for any such encounter.He would at once approach Valentine's father and acknowledgeall, begging Villefort to pardon and sanction the love whichunited two fond and loving hearts. Morrel was mad. Happilyhe did not meet any one. Now, especially, did he find thedescription Valentine had given of the interior of the houseuseful to him; he arrived safely at the top of thestaircase, and while he was feeling his way, a sob indicatedthe direction he was to take. He turned back, a door partlyopen enabled him to see his road, and to hear the voice ofone in sorrow. He pushed the door open and entered. At theother end of the room, under a white sheet which covered it,lay the corpse, still more alarming to Morrel since theaccount he had so unexpectedly overheard. By its side, onher knees, and with her head buried in the cushion of aneasy-chair, was Valentine, trembling and sobbing, her handsextended above her head, clasped and stiff. She had turnedfrom the window, which remained open, and was praying inaccents that would have affected the most unfeeling; herwords were rapid, incoherent, unintelligible, for theburning weight of grief almost stopped her utterance. Themoon shining through the open blinds made the lamp appear toburn paler, and cast a sepulchral hue over the whole scene.Morrel could not resist this; he was not exemplary forpiety, he was not easily impressed, but Valentine suffering,weeping, wringing her hands before him, was more than hecould bear in silence. He sighed, and whispered a name, andthe head bathed in tears and pressed on the velvet cushionof the chair -- a head like that of a Magdalen by Correggio-- was raised and turned towards him. Valentine perceivedhim without betraying the least surprise. A heartoverwhelmed with one great grief is insensible to minoremotions. Morrel held out his hand to her. Valentine, as heronly apology for not having met him, pointed to the corpseunder the sheet, and began to sob again. Neither dared forsome time to speak in that room. They hesitated to break thesilence which death seemed to impose; at length Valentineventured.

　　"My friend," said she, "how came you here? Alas, I would sayyou are welcome, had not death opened the way for you intothis house."

　　"Valentine," said Morrel with a trembling voice, "I hadwaited since half-past eight, and did not see you come; Ibecame uneasy, leaped the wall, found my way through thegarden, when voices conversing about the fatal event" --

　　"What voices ?" asked Valentine. Morrel shuddered as hethought of the conversation of the doctor and M. deVillefort, and he thought he could see through the sheet theextended hands, the stiff neck, and the purple lips.

　　"Your servants," said he, "who were repeating the whole ofthe sorrowful story; from them I learned it all."

　　"But it was risking the failure of our plan to come up here,love."

　　"Forgive me," replied Morrel; "I will go away."

　　"No," said Valentine, "you might meet some one; stay."

　　"But if any one should come here" --

　　The young girl shook her head. "No one will come," said she;"do not fear, there is our safeguard," pointing to the bed.

　　"But what has become of M. d'Epinay?" replied Morrel.

　　"M. Franz arrived to sign the contract just as my deargrandmother was dying."

　　"Alas," said Morrel with a feeling of selfish joy; for hethought this death would cause the wedding to be postponedindefinitely. "But what redoubles my sorrow," continued theyoung girl, as if this feeling was to receive its immediatepunishment, "is that the poor old lady, on her death-bed,requested that the marriage might take place as soon aspossible; she also, thinking to protect me, was actingagainst me."

　　"Hark!" said Morrel. They both listened; steps weredistinctly heard in the corridor and on the stairs.

　　"It is my father, who has just left his study."

　　"To accompany the doctor to the door," added Morrel.

　　"How do you know it is the doctor?" asked Valentine,astonished.

　　"I imagined it must be," said Morrel. Valentine looked atthe young man; they heard the street door close, then M. deVillefort locked the garden door, and returned up-stairs. Hestopped a moment in the anteroom, as if hesitating whetherto turn to his own apartment or into Madame deSaint-Meran's; Morrel concealed himself behind a door;Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to deprive herof all fear. M. de Villefort passed on to his own room."Now," said Valentine, "you can neither go out by the frontdoor nor by the garden." Morrel looked at her withastonishment. "There is but one way left you that is safe,"said she; "it is through my grandfather's room." She rose,"Come," she added. -- "Where?" asked Maximilian.

　　"To my grandfather's room."

　　"I in M. Noirtier's apartment?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Can you mean it, Valentine?"

　　"I have long wished it; he is my only remaining friend andwe both need his help, -- come."

　　"Be careful, Valentine," said Morrel, hesitating to complywith the young girl's wishes; "I now see my error -- I actedlike a madman in coming in here. Are you sure you are morereasonable?"

　　"Yes," said Valentine; "and I have but one scruple, -- thatof leaving my dear grandmother's remains, which I hadundertaken to watch."

　　"Valentine," said Morrel, "death is in itself sacred."

　　"Yes," said Valentine; "besides, it will not be for long."She then crossed the corridor, and led the way down a narrowstaircase to M. Noirtier's room; Morrel followed her ontiptoe; at the door they found the old servant. "Barrois,"said Valentine, "shut the door, and let no one come in." Shepassed first. Noirtier, seated in his chair, and listeningto every sound, was watching the door; he saw Valentine, andhis eye brightened. There was something grave and solemn inthe approach of the young girl which struck the old man, andimmediately his bright eye began to interrogate. "Deargrandfather." said she hurriedly, "you know poor grandmammadied an hour since, and now I have no friend in the worldbut you." His expressive eyes evinced the greatesttenderness. "To you alone, then, may I confide my sorrowsand my hopes?" The paralytic motioned "Yes." Valentine tookMaximilian's hand. "Look attentively, then, at thisgentleman." The old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze withslight astonishment on Morrel. "It is M. Maximilian Morrel,"said she; "the son of that good merchant of Marseilles, whomyou doubtless recollect."

　　"Yes," said the old man. "He brings an irreproachable name,which Maximilian is likely to render glorious, since atthirty years of age he is a captain, an officer of theLegion of Honor." The old man signified that he recollectedhim. "Well, grandpapa," said Valentine, kneeling before him,and pointing to Maximilian, "I love him, and will be onlyhis; were I compelled to marry another, I would destroymyself."

　　The eyes of the paralytic expressed a multitude oftumultuous thoughts. "You like M. Maximilian Morrel, do younot, grandpapa?" asked Valentine.

　　"Yes."

　　"And you will protect us, who are your children, against thewill of my father?" -- Noirtier cast an intelligent glanceat Morrel, as if to say, "perhaps I may." Maximilianunderstood him.

　　"Mademoiselle," said he, "you have a sacred duty to fulfilin your deceased grandmother's room, will you allow me thehonor of a few minutes' conversation with M. Noirtier?"

　　"That is it," said the old man's eye. Then he lookedanxiously at Valentine.

　　"Do you fear he will not understand?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Oh, we have so often spoken of you, that he knows exactlyhow I talk to you." Then turning to Maximilian, with anadorable smile; although shaded by sorrow, -- "He knowseverything I know," said she.

　　Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requestedBarrois not to admit any one, and having tenderly embracedher grandfather, and sorrowfully taken leave of Morrel, shewent away. To prove to Noirtier that he was in Valentine'sconfidence and knew all their secrets, Morrel took thedictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all on atable where there was a light.

　　"But first," said Morrel, "allow me, sir, to tell you who Iam, how much I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are mydesigns respecting her." Noirtier made a sign that he wouldlisten.

　　It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparentlya mere useless burden, becoming the sole protector, support,and adviser of the lovers who were both young, beautiful,and strong. His remarkably noble and austere expressionstruck Morrel, who began his story with trembling. Herelated the manner in which he had become acquainted withValentine, and how he had loved her, and that Valentine, inher solitude and her misfortune, had accepted the offer ofhis devotion. He told him his birth, his position, hisfortune, and more than once, when he consulted the look ofthe paralytic, that look answered, "That is good, proceed."

　　"And now," said Morrel, when he had finished the first partof his recital, "now I have told you of my love and myhopes, may I inform you of my intentions?"

　　"Yes," signified the old man.

　　"This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at thegate, in which I intended to carry off Valentine to mysister's house, to marry her, and to wait respectfully M. deVillefort's pardon."

　　"No," said Noirtier.

　　"We must not do so?"

　　"No."

　　"You do not sanction our project?"

　　"No."

　　"There is another way," said Morrel. The old man'sinterrogative eye said, "What?"

　　"I will go," continued Maximilian, "I will seek M. Franzd'Epinay -- I am happy to be able to mention this inMademoiselle de Villefort's absence -- and will conductmyself toward him so as to compel him to challenge me."Noirtier's look continued to interrogate. "You wish to knowwhat I will do?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I will find him, as I told you. I will tell him the tieswhich bind me to Mademoiselle Valentine; if he be a sensibleman, he will prove it by renouncing of his own accord thehand of his betrothed, and will secure my friendship, andlove until death; if he refuse, either through interest orridiculous pride, after I have proved to him that he wouldbe forcing my wife from me, that Valentine loves me, andwill have no other, I will fight with him, give him everyadvantage, and I shall kill him, or he will kill me; if I amvictorious, he will not marry Valentine, and if I die, I amvery sure Valentine will not marry him." Noirtier watched,with indescribable pleasure, this noble and sincerecountenance, on which every sentiment his tongue uttered wasdepicted, adding by the expression of his fine features allthat coloring adds to a sound and faithful drawing. Still,when Morrel had finished, he shut his eyes several times,which was his manner of saying "No."

　　"No?" said Morrel; "you disapprove of this second project,as you did of the first?"

　　"I do," signified the old man.

　　"But what then must be done?" asked Morrel. "Madame deSaint-Meran's last request was, that the marriage might notbe delayed; must I let things take their course?" Noirtierdid not move. "I understand," said Morrel; "I am to wait."

　　"Yes."

　　"But delay may ruin our plan, sir," replied the young man."Alone, Valentine has no power; she will be compelled tosubmit. I am here almost miraculously, and can scarcely hopefor so good an opportunity to occur again. Believe me, thereare only the two plans I have proposed to you; forgive myvanity, and tell me which you prefer. Do you authorizeMademoiselle Valentine to intrust herself to my honor?"

　　"No."

　　"Do you prefer I should seek M. d'Epinay?"

　　"No."

　　"Whence then will come the help we need -- from chance?"resumed Morrel.

　　"No."

　　"From you?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You thoroughly understand me, sir? Pardon my eagerness, formy life depends on your answer. Will our help come fromyou?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You are sure of it?"

　　"Yes." There was so much firmness in the look which gavethis answer, no one could, at any rate, doubt his will, ifthey did his power. "Oh, thank you a thousand times! Buthow, unless a miracle should restore your speech, yourgesture, your movement, how can you, chained to thatarm-chair, dumb and motionless, oppose this marriage?" Asmile lit up the old man's face, a strange smile of the eyesin a paralyzed face. "Then I must wait?" asked the youngman.

　　"Yes."

　　"But the contract?" The same smile returned. "Will youassure me it shall not be signed?"

　　"Yes," said Noirtier.

　　"The contract shall not be signed!" cried Morrel. "Oh,pardon me, sir; I can scarcely realize so great a happiness.Will they not sign it?"

　　"No," said the paralytic. Notwithstanding that assurance,Morrel still hesitated. This promise of an impotent old manwas so strange that, instead of being the result of thepower of his will, it might emanate from enfeebled organs.Is it not natural that the madman, ignorant of his folly,should attempt things beyond his power? The weak man talksof burdens he can raise, the timid of giants he canconfront, the poor of treasures he spends, the most humblepeasant, in the height of his pride, calls himself Jupiter.Whether Noirtier understood the young man's indecision, orwhether he had not full confidence in his docility, helooked uneasily at him. "What do you wish, sir?" askedMorrel; "that I should renew my promise of remainingtranquil?" Noirtier's eye remained fixed and firm, as if toimply that a promise did not suffice; then it passed fromhis face to his hands.

　　"Shall I swear to you, sir?" asked Maximilian.

　　"Yes?" said the paralytic with the same solemnity. Morrelunderstood that the old man attached great importance to anoath. He extended his hand.

　　"I swear to you, on my honor," said he, "to await yourdecision respecting the course I am to pursue with M.d'Epinay."

　　"That is right," said the old man.

　　"Now," said Morrel, "do you wish me to retire?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Without seeing Mademoiselle Valentine?"

　　"Yes."

　　Morrel made a sign that he was ready to obey. "But," saidhe, "first allow me to embrace you as your daughter did justnow." Noirtier's expression could not be understood. Theyoung man pressed his lips on the same spot, on the oldman's forehead, where Valentine's had been. Then he bowed asecond time and retired. He found outside the door the oldservant, to whom Valentine had given directions. Morrel wasconducted along a dark passage, which led to a little dooropening on the garden, soon found the spot where he hadentered, with the assistance of the shrubs gained the top ofthe wall, and by his ladder was in an instant in theclover-field where his cabriolet was still waiting for him.He got in it, and thoroughly wearied by so many emotions,arrived about midnight in the Rue Meslay, threw himself onhis bed and slept soundly.

　　Chapter 74The Villefort Family Vault.

　　Two days after, a considerable crowd was assembled, towardsten o'clock in the morning, around the door of M. deVillefort's house, and a long file of mourning-coaches andprivate carriages extended along the Faubourg Saint-Honoreand the Rue de la Pepiniere. Among them was one of a verysingular form, which appeared to have come from a distance.It was a kind of covered wagon, painted black, and was oneof the first to arrive. Inquiry was made, and it wasascertained that, by a strange coincidence, this carriagecontained the corpse of the Marquis de Saint-Meran, and thatthose who had come thinking to attend one funeral wouldfollow two. Their number was great. The Marquis deSaint-Meran, one of the most zealous and faithfuldignitaries of Louis XVIII. and King Charles X., hadpreserved a great number of friends, and these, added to thepersonages whom the usages of society gave Villefort a claimon, formed a considerable body.

　　Due information was given to the authorities, and permissionobtained that the two funerals should take place at the sametime. A second hearse, decked with the same funereal pomp,was brought to M. de Villefort's door, and the coffinremoved into it from the post-wagon. The two bodies were tobe interred in the cemetery of Pere-la-Chaise, where M. deVillefort had long since had a tomb prepared for thereception of his family. The remains of poor Renee werealready deposited there, and now, after ten years ofseparation, her father and mother were to be reunited withher. The Parisians, always curious, always affected byfunereal display, looked on with religious silence while thesplendid procession accompanied to their last abode two ofthe number of the old aristocracy -- the greatest protectorsof commerce and sincere devotees to their principles. In oneof the mourning-coaches Beauchamp, Debray, andChateau-Renaud were talking of the very sudden death of themarchioness. "I saw Madame de Saint-Meran only last year atMarseilles, when I was coming back from Algiers," saidChateau-Renaud; "she looked like a woman destined to live tobe a hundred years old, from her apparent sound health andgreat activity of mind and body. How old was she?"

　　"Franz assured me," replied Albert, "that she was sixty-sixyears old. But she has not died of old age, but of grief; itappears that since the death of the marquis, which affectedher very deeply, she has not completely recovered herreason."

　　"But of what disease, then, did she die?" asked Debray.

　　"It is said to have been a congestion of the brain, orapoplexy, which is the same thing, is it not?"

　　"Nearly."

　　"It is difficult to believe that it was apoplexy," saidBeauchamp. "Madame de Saint-Meran, whom I once saw, wasshort, of slender form, and of a much more nervous thansanguine temperament; grief could hardly produce apoplexy insuch a constitution as that of Madame de Saint-Meran."

　　"At any rate," said Albert, "whatever disease or doctor mayhave killed her, M. de Villefort, or rather, MademoiselleValentine, -- or, still rather, our friend Franz, inherits amagnificent fortune, amounting, I believe, to 80,000 livresper annum."

　　"And this fortune will be doubled at the death of the oldJacobin, Noirtier."

　　"That is a tenacious old grandfather," said Beauchamp."Tenacem propositi virum. I think he must have made anagreement with death to outlive all his heirs, and heappears likely to succeed. He resembles the oldConventionalist of '93, who said to Napoleon, in 1814, `Youbend because your empire is a young stem, weakened by rapidgrowth. Take the Republic for a tutor; let us return withrenewed strength to the battle-field, and I promise you500,000 soldiers, another Marengo, and a second Austerlitz.Ideas do not become extinct, sire; they slumber sometimes,but only revive the stronger before they sleep entirely.'Ideas and men appeared the same to him. One thing onlypuzzles me, namely, how Franz d'Epinay will like agrandfather who cannot be separated from his wife. But whereis Franz?"

　　"In the first carriage, with M. de Villefort, who considershim already as one of the family."

　　Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; thesetwo sudden deaths, so quickly following each other,astonished every one, but no one suspected the terriblesecret which M. d'Avrigny had communicated, in his nocturnalwalk to M. de Villefort. They arrived in about an hour atthe cemetery; the weather was mild, but dull, and in harmonywith the funeral ceremony. Among the groups which flockedtowards the family vault, Chateau-Renaud recognized Morrel,who had come alone in a cabriolet, and walked silently alongthe path bordered with yew-trees. "You here?" saidChateau-Renaud, passing his arms through the youngcaptain's; "are you a friend of Villefort's? How is it thatI have never met you at his house?"

　　"I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort's." answeredMorrel, "but I was of Madame de Saint-Meran." Albert came upto them at this moment with Franz.

　　"The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction."said Albert; "but we are not superstitious. M. Morrel, allowme to present to you M. Franz d'Epinay, a delightfultravelling companion, with whom I made the tour of Italy. Mydear Franz, M. Maximilian Morrel, an excellent friend I haveacquired in your absence, and whose name you will hear memention every time I make any allusion to affection, wit, oramiability." Morrel hesitated for a moment; he feared itwould be hypocritical to accost in a friendly manner the manwhom he was tacitly opposing, but his oath and the gravityof the circumstances recurred to his memory; he struggled toconceal his emotion and bowed to Franz. "Mademoiselle deVillefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?" said Debray toFranz.

　　"Extremely," replied he; "she looked so pale this morning, Iscarcely knew her." These apparently simple words piercedMorrel to the heart. This man had seen Valentine, and spokento her! The young and high-spirited officer required all hisstrength of mind to resist breaking his oath. He took thearm of Chateau-Renaud, and turned towards the vault, wherethe attendants had already placed the two coffins. "This isa magnificent habitation," said Beauchamp, looking towardsthe mausoleum; "a summer and winter palace. You will, inturn, enter it, my dear d'Epinay, for you will soon benumbered as one of the family. I, as a philosopher, shouldlike a little country-house, a cottage down there under thetrees, without so many free-stones over my poor body. Indying, I will say to those around me what Voltaire wrote toPiron: `Eo rus, and all will be over.' But come, Franz, takecourage, your wife is an heiress."

　　"Indeed, Beauchamp, you are unbearable. Politics has madeyou laugh at everything, and political men have made youdisbelieve everything. But when you have the honor ofassociating with ordinary men, and the pleasure of leavingpolitics for a moment, try to find your affectionate heart,which you leave with your stick when you go to the Chamber."

　　"But tell me," said Beauchamp, "what is life? Is it not ahall in Death's anteroom?"

　　"I am prejudiced against Beauchamp," said Albert, drawingFranz away, and leaving the former to finish hisphilosophical dissertation with Debray. The Villefort vaultformed a square of white stones, about twenty feet high; aninterior partition separated the two families, and eachapartment had its entrance door. Here were not, as in othertombs, ignoble drawers, one above another, where thriftbestows its dead and labels them like specimens in a museum;all that was visible within the bronze gates was agloomy-looking room, separated by a wall from the vaultitself. The two doors before mentioned were in the middle ofthis wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Merancoffins. There grief might freely expend itself withoutbeing disturbed by the trifling loungers who came from apicnic party to visit Pere-la-Chaise, or by lovers who makeit their rendezvous.

　　The two coffins were placed on trestles previously preparedfor their reception in the right-hand crypt belonging to theSaint-Meran family. Villefort, Franz, and a few nearrelatives alone entered the sanctuary.

　　As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at thedoor, and there was no address given, the party allseparated; Chateau-Renaud, Albert, and Morrel, went one way,and Debray and Beauchamp the other. Franz remained with M.de Villefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel made anexcuse to wait; he saw Franz and M. de Villefort get intothe same mourning coach, and thought this meeting forbodedevil. He then returned to Paris, and although in the samecarriage with Chateau-Renaud and Albert, he did not hear oneword of their conversation. As Franz was about to take leaveof M. de Villefort, "When shall I see you again?" said thelatter.

　　"At what time you please, sir," replied Franz.

　　"As soon as possible."

　　"I am at your command, sir; shall we return together?"

　　"If not unpleasant to you."

　　"On the contrary, I shall feel much pleasure." Thus, thefuture father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage,and Morrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. Villefort andFranz returned to the Faubourg Saint-Honore. The procureur,without going to see either his wife or his daughter, wentat once to his study, and, offering the young man a chair,-- "M. d'Epinay," said he, "allow me to remind you at thismoment, -- which is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at firstsight may appear, for obedience to the wishes of thedeparted is the first offering which should be made at theirtomb, -- allow me then to remind you of the wish expressedby Madame de Saint-Meran on her death-bed, that Valentine'swedding might not be deferred. You know the affairs of thedeceased are in perfect order, and her will bequeaths toValentine the entire property of the Saint-Meran family; thenotary showed me the documents yesterday, which will enableus to draw up the contract immediately. You may call on thenotary, M. Deschamps, Place Beauveau, Faubourg Saint-Honore,and you have my authority to inspect those deeds."

　　"Sir," replied M. d'Epinay, "it is not, perhaps, the momentfor Mademoiselle Valentine, who is in deep distress, tothink of a husband; indeed, I fear" --

　　"Valentine will have no greater pleasure than that offulfilling her grandmother's last injunctions; there will beno obstacle from that quarter, I assure you."

　　"In that case," replied Franz, "as I shall raise none, youmay make arrangements when you please; I have pledged myword, and shall feel pleasure and happiness in adhering toit."

　　"Then," said Villefort, "nothing further is required. Thecontract was to have been signed three days since; we shallfind it all ready, and can sign it to-day."

　　"But the mourning?" said Franz, hesitating.

　　"Don't be uneasy on that score," replied Villefort; "noceremony will be neglected in my house. Mademoiselle deVillefort may retire during the prescribed three months toher estate of Saint-Meran; I say hers, for she inherits itto-day. There, after a few days, if you like, the civilmarriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony.Madame de Saint-Meran wished her daughter should be marriedthere. When that in over, you, sir, can return to Paris,while your wife passes the time of her mourning with hermother-in-law."

　　"As you please, sir," said Franz.

　　"Then," replied M. de Villefort, "have the kindness to waithalf an hour; Valentine shall come down into thedrawing-room. I will send for M. Deschamps; we will read andsign the contract before we separate, and this eveningMadame de Villefort; shall accompany Valentine to herestate, where we will rejoin them in a week."

　　"Sir," said Franz, "I have one request to make."

　　"What is it?"

　　"I wish Albert de Morcerf and Raoul de Chateau-Renaud to bepresent at this signature; you know they are my witnesses."

　　"Half an hour will suffice to apprise them; will you go forthem yourself, or shall you send?"

　　"I prefer going, sir."

　　"I shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, andValentine will be ready." Franz bowed and left the room.Scarcely had the door closed, when M. de Villefort sent totell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in half anhour, as he expected the notary and M. d'Epinay and hiswitnesses. The news caused a great sensation throughout thehouse; Madame de Villefort would not believe it, andValentine was thunderstruck. She looked around for help, andwould have gone down to her grandfather's room, but on thestairs she met M. de Villefort, who took her arm and led herinto the drawing-room. In the anteroom, Valentine metBarrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. Amoment later, Madame de Villefort entered the drawing-roomwith her little Edward. It was evident that she had sharedthe grief of the family, for she was pale and lookedfatigued. She sat down, took Edward on her knees, and fromtime to time pressed this child, on whom her affectionsappeared centred, almost convulsively to her bosom. Twocarriages were soon heard to enter the court yard. One wasthe notary's; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In amoment the whole party was assembled. Valentine was so paleone might trace the blue veins from her temples, round hereyes and down her cheeks. Franz was deeply affected.Chateau-Renaud and Albert looked at each other withamazement; the ceremony which was just concluded had notappeared more sorrowful than did that which was about tobegin. Madame de Villefort had placed herself in the shadowbehind a velvet curtain, and as she constantly bent over herchild, it was difficult to read the expression of her face.M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.

　　The notary, after having according to the customary methodarranged the papers on the table, taken his place in anarmchair, and raised his spectacles, turned towards Franz:

　　"Are you M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d'Epinay?" asked he,although he knew it perfectly.

　　"Yes, sir," replied Franz. The notary bowed. "I have, then,to inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort, thatyour projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort haschanged the feeling of M. Noirtier towards his grandchild,and that he disinherits her entirely of the fortune he wouldhave left her. Let me hasten to add," continued he, "thatthe testator, having only the right to alienate a part ofhis fortune, and having alienated it all, the will will notbear scrutiny, and is declared null and void."

　　"Yes." said Villefort; "but I warn M. d'Epinay, that duringmy life-time my father's will shall never be questioned, myposition forbidding any doubt to be entertained."

　　"Sir," said Franz, "I regret much that such a question hasbeen raised in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; Ihave never inquired the amount of her fortune, which,however limited it may be, exceeds mine. My family hassought consideration in this alliance with M. de Villefort;all I seek is happiness." Valentine imperceptibly thankedhim, while two silent tears rolled down her cheeks."Besides, sir," said Villefort, addressing himself to hisfuture son-in-law, "excepting the loss of a portion of yourhopes, this unexpected will need not personally wound you;M. Noirtier's weakness of mind sufficiently explains it. Itis not because Mademoiselle Valentine is going to marry youthat he is angry, but because she will marry, a union withany other would have caused him the same sorrow. Old age isselfish, sir, and Mademoiselle de Villefort has been afaithful companion to M. Noirtier, which she cannot be whenshe becomes the Baroness d'Epinay. My father's melancholystate prevents our speaking to him on any subjects, whichthe weakness of his mind would incapacitate him fromunderstanding, and I am perfectly convinced that at thepresent time, although, he knows that his granddaughter isgoing to be married, M. Noirtier has even forgotten the nameof his intended grandson." M. de Villefort had scarcely saidthis, when the door opened, and Barrois appeared.

　　"Gentlemen," said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servantspeaking to his masters under such solemn circumstances, --"gentlemen, M. Noirtier de Villefort wishes to speakimmediately to M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d'Epinay;" he, aswell as the notary, that there might be no mistake in theperson, gave all his titles to the bride-groom elect.

　　Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip fromher knees, Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albertand Chateau-Renaud exchanged a second look, more full ofamazement than the first. The notary looked at Villefort."It is impossible," said the procureur. "M. d'Epinay cannotleave the drawing-room at present."

　　"It is at this moment," replied Barrois with the samefirmness, "that M. Noirtier, my master, wishes to speak onimportant subjects to M. Franz d'Epinay."

　　"Grandpapa Noirtier can speak now, then," said Edward, withhis habitual quickness. However, his remark did not makeMadame de Villefort even smile, so much was every mindengaged, and so solemn was the situation. Astonishment wasat its height. Something like a smile was perceptible onMadame de Villefort's countenance. Valentine instinctivelyraised her eyes, as if to thank heaven.

　　"Pray go, Valentine," said; M. de Villefort, "and see whatthis new fancy of your grandfather's is." Valentine rosequickly, and was hastening joyfully towards the door, whenM. de Villefort altered his intention.

　　"Stop," said he; "I will go with you."

　　"Excuse me, sir," said Franz, "since M. Noirtier sent forme, I am ready to attend to his wish; besides, I shall behappy to pay my respects to him, not having yet had thehonor of doing so."

　　"Pray, sir," said Villefort with marked uneasiness, "do notdisturb yourself."

　　"Forgive me, sir," said Franz in a resolute tone. "I wouldnot lose this opportunity of proving to M. Noirtier howwrong it would be of him to encourage feelings of dislike tome, which I am determined to conquer, whatever they may be,by my devotion." And without listening to Villefort hearose, and followed Valentine, who was running down-stairswith the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who finds a rock tocling to. M. de Villefort followed them. Chateau-Renaud andMorcerf exchanged a third look of still increasing wonder.

　　Chapter 75A Signed Statement.

　　Noirtier was prepared to receive them, dressed in black, andinstalled in his arm-chair. When the three persons heexpected had entered, he looked at the door, which his valetimmediately closed.

　　"Listen," whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could notconceal her joy; "if M. Noirtier wishes to communicateanything which would delay your marriage, I forbid you tounderstand him." Valentine blushed, but did not answer.Villefort, approaching Noirtier -- "Here is M. Franzd'Epinay," said he; "you requested to see him. We have allwished for this interview, and I trust it will convince youhow ill-formed are your objections to Valentine's marriage."

　　Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort'sblood run cold. He motioned to Valentine to approach. In amoment, thanks to her habit of conversing with hergrandfather, she understood that he asked for a key. Thenhis eye was fixed on the drawer of a small chest between thewindows. She opened the drawer, and found a key; and,understanding that was what he wanted, again watched hiseyes, which turned toward an old secretary which had beenneglected for many years and was supposed to contain nothingbut useless documents. "Shall I open the secretary?" askedValentine.

　　"Yes," said the old man.

　　"And the drawers?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Those at the side?"

　　"No."

　　"The middle one?"

　　"Yes." Valentine opened it and drew out a bundle of papers."Is that what you wish for?" asked she.

　　"No."

　　She took successively all the other papers out till thedrawer was empty. "But there are no more," said she.Noirtier's eye was fixed on the dictionary. "Yes, Iunderstand, grandfather," said the young girl.

　　"He pointed to each letter of the alphabet. At the letter Sthe old man stopped her. She opened, and found the word"secret."

　　"Ah, is there a secret spring?" said Valentine.

　　"Yes," said Noirtier.

　　"And who knows it?" Noirtier looked at the door where theservant had gone out. "Barrois?" said she.

　　"Yes."

　　"Shall I call him?"

　　"Yes."

　　Valentine went to the door, and called Barrois. Villefort'simpatience during this scene made the perspiration roll fromhis forehead, and Franz was stupefied. The old servant came."Barrois," said Valentine, "my grandfather has told me toopen that drawer in the secretary, but there is a secretspring in it, which you know -- will you open it?"

　　Barrois looked at the old man. "Obey," said Noirtier'sintelligent eye. Barrois touched a spring, the false bottomcame out, and they saw a bundle of papers tied with a blackstring.

　　"Is that what you wish for?" said Barrois.

　　"Yes."

　　"Shall I give these papers to M. de Villefort?"

　　"No."

　　"To Mademoiselle Valentine?"

　　"No."

　　"To M. Franz d'Epinay?"

　　"Yes."

　　Franz, astonished, advanced a step. "To me, sir?" said he.

　　"Yes." Franz took them from Barrois and casting a glance atthe cover, read: --

　　"`To be given, after my death, to General Durand, who shallbequeath the packet to his son, with an injunction topreserve it as containing an important document.'

　　"Well, sir," asked Franz, "what do you wish me to do withthis paper?"

　　"To preserve it, sealed up as it is, doubtless," said theprocureur.

　　"No," replied Noirtier eagerly.

　　"Do you wish him to read it?" said Valentine.

　　"Yes," replied the old man. "You understand, baron, mygrandfather wishes you to read this paper," said Valentine.

　　"Then let us sit down," said Villefort impatiently, "for itwill take some time."

　　"Sit down," said the old man. Villefort took a chair, butValentine remained standing by her father's side, and Franzbefore him, holding the mysterious paper in his hand."Read," said the old man. Franz untied it, and in the midstof the most profound silence read:

　　"`Extract from the Report of a meeting of the BonapartistClub in the Rue Saint-Jacques, held February 5th, 1815.'"

　　Franz stopped. "February 5th, 1815!" said he; "it is the daymy father was murdered." Valentine and Villefort were dumb;the eye of the old man alone seemed to say clearly, "Go on."

　　"But it was on leaving this club," said he, "my fatherdisappeared." Noirtier's eye continued to say, "Read." Heresumed: --

　　"`The undersigned Louis Jacques Beaurepaire,lieutenant-colonel of artillery, Etienne Duchampy, generalof brigade, and Claude Lecharpal, keeper of woods andforests, Declare, that on the 4th of February, a letterarrived from the Island of Elba, recommending to thekindness and the confidence of the Bonapartist Club, GeneralFlavien de Quesnel, who having served the emperor from 1804to 1814 was supposed to be devoted to the interests of theNapoleon dynasty, notwithstanding the title of baron whichLouis XVIII. had just granted to him with his estate ofEpinay.

　　"`A note was in consequence addressed to General de Quesnel,begging him to be present at the meeting next day, the 5th.The note indicated neither the street nor the number of thehouse where the meeting was to be held; it bore nosignature, but it announced to the general that some onewould call for him if he would be ready at nine o'clock. Themeetings were always held from that time till midnight. Atnine o'clock the president of the club presented himself;the general was ready, the president informed him that oneof the conditions of his introduction was that he should beeternally ignorant of the place of meeting, and that hewould allow his eyes to be bandaged, swearing that he wouldnot endeavor to take off the bandage. General de Quesnelaccepted the condition, and promised on his honor not toseek to discover the road they took. The general's carriagewas ready, but the president told him it was impossible forhim to use it, since it was useless to blindfold the masterif the coachman knew through what streets he went. "Whatmust be done then?" asked the general. -- "I have mycarriage here," said the president.

　　"`"Have you, then, so much confidence in your servant thatyou can intrust him with a secret you will not allow me toknow?"

　　"`"Our coachman is a member of the club," said thepresident; "we shall be driven by a State-Councillor."

　　"`"Then we run another risk," said the general, laughing,"that of being upset." We insert this joke to prove that thegeneral was not in the least compelled to attend themeeting, but that he came willingly. When they were seatedin the carriage the president reminded the general of hispromise to allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he madeno opposition. On the road the president thought he saw thegeneral make an attempt to remove the handkerchief, andreminded him of his oath. "Sure enough," said the general.The carriage stopped at an alley leading out of the RueSaint-Jacques. The general alighted, leaning on the arm ofthe president, of whose dignity he was not aware,considering him simply as a member of the club; they wentthrough the alley, mounted a flight of stairs, and enteredthe assembly-room.

　　"`"The deliberations had already begun. The members,apprised of the sort of presentation which was to be madethat evening, were all in attendance. When in the middle ofthe room the general was invited to remove his bandage, hedid so immediately, and was surprised to see so manywell-known faces in a society of whose existence he had tillthen been ignorant. They questioned him as to hissentiments, but he contented himself with answering, thatthe letters from the Island of Elba ought to have informedthem'" --

　　Franz interrupted himself by saying, "My father was aroyalist; they need not have asked his sentiments, whichwere well known."

　　"And hence," said Villefort, "arose my affection for yourfather, my dear M. Franz. Opinions held in common are aready bond of union."

　　"Read again," said the old man. Franz continued: --

　　"`The president then sought to make him speak moreexplicitly, but M. de Quesnel replied that he wished firstto know what they wanted with him. He was then informed ofthe contents of the letter from the Island of Elba, in whichhe was recommended to the club as a man who would be likelyto advance the interests of their party. One paragraph spokeof the return of Bonaparte and promised another letter andfurther details, on the arrival of the Pharaon belonging tothe shipbuilder Morrel, of Marseilles, whose captain wasentirely devoted to the emperor. During all this time, thegeneral, on whom they thought to have relied as on abrother, manifested evidently signs of discontent andrepugnance. When the reading was finished, he remainedsilent, with knitted brows.

　　"`"Well," asked the president, "what do you say to thisletter, general?"

　　"`"I say that it is too soon after declaring myself forLouis XVIII. to break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor."This answer was too clear to permit of any mistake as to hissentiments. "General," said the president, "we acknowledgeno King Louis XVIII., or an ex-emperor, but his majesty theemperor and king, driven from France, which is his kingdom,by violence and treason."

　　"`"Excuse me, gentlemen," said the general; "you may notacknowledge Louis XVIII., but I do, as he has made me abaron and a field-marshal, and I shall never forget that forthese two titles I am indebted to his happy return toFrance."

　　"`"Sir," said the president, rising with gravity, "becareful what you say; your words clearly show us that theyare deceived concerning you in the Island of Elba, and havedeceived us! The communication has been made to you inconsequence of the confidence placed in you, and which doesyou honor. Now we discover our error; a title and promotionattach you to the government we wish to overturn. We willnot constrain you to help us; we enroll no one against hisconscience, but we will compel you to act generously, evenif you are not disposed to do so."

　　"`"You would call acting generously, knowing your conspiracyand not informing against you, that is what I should callbecoming your accomplice. You see I am more candid thanyou."'"

　　"Ah, my father!" said Franz, interrupting himself. "Iunderstand now why they murdered him." Valentine could nothelp casting one glance towards the young man, whose filialenthusiasm it was delightful to behold. Villefort walked toand fro behind them. Noirtier watched the expression of eachone, and preserved his dignified and commanding attitude.Franz returned to the manuscript, and continued: --

　　"`"Sir," said the president, "you have been invited to jointhis assembly -- you were not forced here; it was proposedto you to come blindfolded -- you accepted. When youcomplied with this twofold request you well knew we did notwish to secure the throne of Louis XVIII., or we should nottake so much care to avoid the vigilance of the police. Itwould be conceding too much to allow you to put on a mask toaid you in the discovery of our secret, and then to removeit that you may ruin those who have confided in you. No, no,you must first say if you declare yourself for the king of aday who now reigns, or for his majesty the emperor."

　　"`"I am a royalist," replied the general; "I have taken theoath of allegiance to Louis XVIII., and I will adhere toit." These words were followed by a general murmur, and itwas evident that several of the members were discussing thepropriety of making the general repent of his rashness.

　　"`The president again arose, and having imposed silence,said, -- "Sir, you are too serious and too sensible a mannot to understand the consequences of our present situation,and your candor has already dictated to us the conditionswhich remain for us to offer you." The general, putting hishand on his sword, exclaimed, -- "If you talk of honor, donot begin by disavowing its laws, and impose nothing byviolence."

　　"`"And you, sir," continued the president, with a calmnessstill more terrible than the general's anger, "I advise younot to touch your sword." The general looked around him withslight uneasiness; however he did not yield, but calling upall his fortitude, said, -- "I will not swear."

　　"`"Then you must die," replied the president calmly. M.d'Epinay became very pale; he looked round him a secondtime, several members of the club were whispering, andgetting their arms from under their cloaks. "General," saidthe president, "do not alarm yourself; you are among men ofhonor who will use every means to convince you beforeresorting to the last extremity, but as you have said, youare among conspirators, you are in possession of our secret,and you must restore it to us." A significant silencefollowed these words, and as the general did not reply, --"Close the doors," said the president to the door-keeper.

　　"`The same deadly silence succeeded these words. Then thegeneral advanced, and making a violent effort to control hisfeelings, -- "I have a son," said he, "and I ought to thinkof him, finding myself among assassins."

　　"`"General," said the chief of the assembly, "one man mayinsult fifty -- it is the privilege of weakness. But he doeswrong to use his privilege. Follow my advice, swear, and donot insult." The general, again daunted by the superiorityof the chief, hesitated a moment; then advancing to thepresident's desk, -- "What is the form, said he.

　　"`"It is this: -- `I swear by my honor not to reveal to anyone what I have seen and heard on the 5th of February, 1815,between nine and ten o'clock in the evening; and I pleadguilty of death should I ever violate this oath.'" Thegeneral appeared to be affected by a nervous tremor, whichprevented his answering for some moments; then, overcominghis manifest repugnance, he pronounced the required oath,but in so low a tone as to be scarcely audible to themajority of the members, who insisted on his repeating itclearly and distinctly, which he did.

　　"`"Now am I at liberty to retire?" said the general. Thepresident rose, appointed three members to accompany him,and got into the carriage with the general after bandaginghis eyes. One of those three members was the coachman whohad driven them there. The other members silently dispersed."Where do you wish to be taken?" asked the president. --"Anywhere out of your presence," replied M. d'Epinay."Beware, sir," replied the president, "you are no longer inthe assembly, and have only to do with individuals; do notinsult them unless you wish to be held responsible." Butinstead of listening, M. d'Epinay went on, -- "You are stillas brave in your carriage as in your assembly because youare still four against one." The president stopped thecoach. They were at that part of the Quai des Ormes wherethe steps lead down to the river. "Why do you stop here?"asked d'Epinay.

　　"`"Because, sir," said the president, "you have insulted aman, and that man will not go one step farther withoutdemanding honorable reparation."

　　"`"Another method of assassination?" said the general,shrugging his shoulders.

　　"`"Make no noise, sir, unless you wish me to consider you asone of the men of whom you spoke just now as cowards, whotake their weakness for a shield. You are alone, one aloneshall answer you; you have a sword by your side, I have onein my cane; you have no witness, one of these gentlemen willserve you. Now, if you please, remove your bandage." Thegeneral tore the handkerchief from his eyes. "At last," saidhe, "I shall know with whom I have to do." They opened thedoor and the four men alighted.'"

　　Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold dropsfrom his brow; there was something awful in hearing the sonread aloud in trembling pallor these details of his father'sdeath, which had hitherto been a mystery. Valentine claspedher hands as if in prayer. Noirtier looked at Villefort withan almost sublime expression of contempt and pride. Franzcontinued: --

　　"`It was, as we said, the fifth of February. For three daysthe mercury had been five or six degrees below freezing andthe steps were covered with ice. The general was stout andtall, the president offered him the side of the railing toassist him in getting down. The two witnesses followed. Itwas a dark night. The ground from the steps to the river wascovered with snow and hoarfrost, the water of the riverlooked black and deep. One of the seconds went for a lanternin a coal-barge near, and by its light they examined theweapons. The president's sword, which was simply, as he hadsaid, one he carried in his cane, was five inches shorterthan the general's, and had no guard. The general proposedto cast lots for the swords, but the president said it washe who had given the provocation, and when he had given ithe had supposed each would use his own arms. The witnessesendeavored to insist, but the president bade them be silent.The lantern was placed on the ground, the two adversariestook their stations, and the duel began. The light made thetwo swords appear like flashes of lightning; as for the men,they were scarcely perceptible, the darkness was so great.

　　"`General d'Epinay passed for one of the best swordsmen inthe army, but he was pressed so closely in the onset that hemissed his aim and fell. The witnesses thought he was dead,but his adversary, who knew he had not struck him, offeredhim the assistance of his hand to rise. The circumstanceirritated instead of calming the general, and he rushed onhis adversary. But his opponent did not allow his guard tobe broken. He received him on his sword and three times thegeneral drew back on finding himself too closely engaged,and then returned to the charge. At the third he fell again.They thought he slipped, as at first, and the witnesses,seeing he did not move, approached and endeavored to raisehim, but the one who passed his arm around the body found itwas moistened with blood. The general, who had almostfainted, revived. "Ah," said he, "they have sent somefencing-master to fight with me." The president, withoutanswering, approached the witness who held the lantern, andraising his sleeve, showed him two wounds he had received inhis arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning hiswaistcoat, displayed his side, pierced with a third wound.Still he had not even uttered a sigh. General d'Epinay diedfive minutes after.'"

　　Franz read these last words in a voice so choked that theywere hardly audible, and then stopped, passing his hand overhis eyes as if to dispel a cloud; but after a moment'ssilence, he continued: --

　　"`The president went up the steps, after pushing his swordinto his cane; a track of blood on the snow marked hiscourse. He had scarcely arrived at the top when he heard aheavy splash in the water -- it was the general's body,which the witnesses had just thrown into the river afterascertaining that he was dead. The general fell, then, in aloyal duel, and not in ambush as it might have beenreported. In proof of this we have signed this paper toestablish the truth of the facts, lest the moment shouldarrive when either of the actors in this terrible sceneshould be accused of premeditated murder or of infringementof the laws of honor.

　　"`Signed, Beaurepaire, Deschamps, and Lecharpal.'"

　　When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadfulfor a son; when Valentine, pale with emotion, had wiped awaya tear; when Villefort, trembling, and crouched in a corner,had endeavored to lessen the storm by supplicating glancesat the implacable old man, -- "Sir," said d'Epinay toNoirtier, "since you are well acquainted with all thesedetails, which are attested by honorable signatures, --since you appear to take some interest in me, although youhave only manifested it hitherto by causing me sorrow,refuse me not one final satisfaction -- tell me the name ofthe president of the club, that I may at least know whokilled my father." Villefort mechanically felt for thehandle of the door; Valentine, who understood sooner thananyone her grandfather's answer, and who had often seen twoscars upon his right arm, drew back a few steps."Mademoiselle," said Franz, turning towards Valentine,"unite your efforts with mine to find out the name of theman who made me an orphan at two years of age." Valentineremained dumb and motionless.

　　"Hold, sir," said Villefort, "do not prolong this dreadfulscene. The names have been purposely concealed; my fatherhimself does not know who this president was, and if heknows, he cannot tell you; proper names are not in thedictionary."

　　"Oh, misery," cried Franz: "the only hope which sustained meand enabled me to read to the end was that of knowing, atleast, the name of him who killed my father! Sir, sir,"cried he, turning to Noirtier, "do what you can -- make meunderstand in some way!"

　　"Yes," replied Noirtier.

　　"Oh, mademoiselle, -- mademoiselle!" cried Franz, "yourgrandfather says he can indicate the person. Help me, --lend me your assistance!" Noirtier looked at the dictionary.Franz took it with a nervous trembling, and repeated theletters of the alphabet successively, until he came to M. Atthat letter the old man signified "Yes."

　　"M," repeated Franz. The young man's finger, glided over thewords, but at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign.Valentine hid her head between her hands. At length, Franzarrived at the word MYSELF.

　　"Yes!"

　　"You?" cried Franz, whose hair stood on end; "you, M.Noirtier -- you killed my father?"

　　"Yes!" replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the youngman. Franz fell powerless on a chair; Villefort opened thedoor and escaped, for the idea had entered his mind tostifle the little remaining life in the heart of thisterrible old man.

　　Chapter 76Progress of Cavalcanti the Younger.

　　Meanwhile M. Cavalcanti the elder had returned to hisservice, not in the army of his majesty the Emperor ofAustria, but at the gaming-table of the baths of Lucca, ofwhich he was one of the most assiduous courtiers. He hadspent every farthing that had been allowed for his journeyas a reward for the majestic and solemn manner in which hehad maintained his assumed character of father. M. Andrea athis departure inherited all the papers which proved that hehad indeed the honor of being the son of the MarquisBartolomeo and the Marchioness Oliva Corsinari. He was nowfairly launched in that Parisian society which gives suchready access to foreigners, and treats them, not as theyreally are, but as they wish to be considered. Besides, whatis required of a young man in Paris? To speak its languagetolerably, to make a good appearance, to be a good gamester,and to pay in cash. They are certainly less particular witha foreigner than with a Frenchman. Andrea had, then, in afortnight, attained a very fair position. He was calledcount, he was said to possess 50,000 livres per annum; andhis father's immense riches, buried in the quarries ofSaravezza, were a constant theme. A learned man, before whomthe last circumstance was mentioned as a fact, declared hehad seen the quarries in question, which gave great weightto assertions hitherto somewhat doubtful, but which nowassumed the garb of reality.

　　Such was the state of society in Paris at the period webring before our readers, when Monte Cristo went one eveningto pay M. Danglars a visit. M. Danglars was out, but thecount was asked to go and see the baroness, and he acceptedthe invitation. It was never without a nervous shudder,since the dinner at Auteuil, and the events which followedit, that Madame Danglars heard Monte Cristo's nameannounced. If he did not come, the painful sensation becamemost intense; if, on the contrary, he appeared, his noblecountenance, his brilliant eyes, his amiability, his politeattention even towards Madame Danglars, soon dispelled everyimpression of fear. It appeared impossible to the baronessthat a man of such delightfully pleasing manners shouldentertain evil designs against her; besides, the mostcorrupt minds only suspect evil when it would answer someinterested end -- useless injury is repugnant to every mind.When Monte Cristo entered the boudoir, -- to which we havealready once introduced our readers, and where the baronesswas examining some drawings, which her daughter passed toher after having looked at them with M. Cavalcanti, -- hispresence soon produced its usual effect, and it was withsmiles that the baroness received the count, although shehad been a little disconcerted at the announcement of hisname. The latter took in the whole scene at a glance.

　　The baroness was partially reclining on a sofa, Eugenie satnear her, and Cavalcanti was standing. Cavalcanti, dressedin black, like one of Goethe's heroes, with varnished shoesand white silk open-worked stockings, passed a white andtolerably nice-looking hand through his light hair, and sodisplayed a sparkling diamond, that in spite of MonteCristo's advice the vain young man had been unable to resistputting on his little finger. This movement was accompaniedby killing glances at Mademoiselle Danglars, and by sighslaunched in the same direction. Mademoiselle Danglars wasstill the same -- cold, beautiful, and satirical. Not one ofthese glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they mighthave been said to fall on the shield of Minerva, which somephilosophers assert protected sometimes the breast ofSappho. Eugenie bowed coldly to the count, and availedherself of the first moment when the conversation becameearnest to escape to her study, whence very soon twocheerful and noisy voices being heard in connection withoccasional notes of the piano assured Monte Cristo thatMademoiselle Danglars preferred to his society and to thatof M. Cavalcanti the company of Mademoiselle Louised'Armilly, her singing teacher.

　　It was then, especially while conversing with MadameDanglars, and apparently absorbed by the charm of theconversation, that the count noticed M. Andrea Cavalcanti'ssolicitude, his manner of listening to the music at the doorhe dared not pass, and of manifesting his admiration. Thebanker soon returned. His first look was certainly directedtowards Monte Cristo, but the second was for Andrea. As forhis wife, he bowed to her, as some husbands do to theirwives, but in a way that bachelors will never comprehend,until a very extensive code is published on conjugal life.

　　"Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?"said Danglars to Andrea. "Alas, no, sir," replied Andreawith a sigh, still more remarkable than the former ones.Danglars immediately advanced towards the door and openedit.

　　The two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, atthe piano, accompanying themselves, each with one hand, afancy to which they had accustomed themselves, and performedadmirably. Mademoiselle d'Armilly, whom they then perceivedthrough the open doorway, formed with Eugenie one of thetableaux vivants of which the Germans are so fond. She wassomewhat beautiful, and exquisitely formed -- a littlefairy-like figure, with large curls falling on her neck,which was rather too long, as Perugino sometimes makes hisVirgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue. She was said tohave a weak chest, and like Antonia in the "Cremona Violin,"she would die one day while singing. Monte Cristo cast onerapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it was thefirst time he had ever seen Mademoiselle d'Armilly, of whomhe had heard much. "Well," said the banker to his daughter,"are we then all to be excluded?" He then led the young maninto the study, and either by chance or manoeuvre the doorwas partially closed after Andrea, so that from the placewhere they sat neither the Count nor the baroness could seeanything; but as the banker had accompanied Andrea, MadameDanglars appeared to take no notice of it.

　　The count soon heard Andrea's voice, singing a Corsicansong, accompanied by the piano. While the count smiled athearing this song, which made him lose sight of Andrea inthe recollection of Benedetto, Madame Danglars was boastingto Monte Cristo of her husband's strength of mind, who thatvery morning had lost three or four hundred thousand francsby a failure at Milan. The praise was well deserved, for hadnot the count heard it from the baroness, or by one of thosemeans by which he knew everything, the baron's countenancewould not have led him to suspect it. "Hem," thought MonteCristo, "he begins to conceal his losses; a month since heboasted of them." Then aloud, -- "Oh, madame, M. Danglars isso skilful, he will soon regain at the Bourse what he loseselsewhere."

　　"I see that you participate in a prevalent error," saidMadame Danglars. "What is it?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"That M. Danglars speculates, whereas he never does."

　　"Truly, madame, I recollect M. Debray told me -- apropos,what is become of him? I have seen nothing of him the lastthree or four days."

　　"Nor I," said Madame Danglars; "but you began a sentence,sir, and did not finish."

　　"Which?"

　　"M. Debray had told you" --

　　"Ah, yes; he told me it was you who sacrificed to the demonof speculation."

　　"I was once very fond of it, but I do not indulge now."

　　"Then you are wrong, madame. Fortune is precarious; and if Iwere a woman and fate had made me a banker's wife, whatevermight be my confidence in my husband's good fortune, stillin speculation you know there is great risk. Well, I wouldsecure for myself a fortune independent of him, even if Iacquired it by placing my interests in hands unknown tohim." Madame Danglars blushed, in spite of all her efforts."Stay," said Monte Cristo, as though he had not observed herconfusion, "I have heard of a lucky hit that was madeyesterday on the Neapolitan bonds."

　　"I have none -- nor have I ever possessed any; but really wehave talked long enough of money, count, we are like twostockbrokers; have you heard how fate is persecuting thepoor Villeforts?"

　　"What has happened?" said the count, simulating totalignorance.

　　"You know the Marquis of Saint-Meran died a few days afterhe had set out on his journey to Paris, and the marchionessa few days after her arrival?"

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "I have heard that; but, asClaudius said to Hamlet, `it is a law of nature; theirfathers died before them, and they mourned their loss; theywill die before their children, who will, in their turn,grieve for them.'"

　　"But that is not all."

　　"Not all!"

　　"No; they were going to marry their daughter" --

　　"To M. Franz d'Epinay. Is it broken off?"

　　"Yesterday morning, it appears, Franz declined the honor."

　　"Indeed? And is the reason known?"

　　"No."

　　"How extraordinary! And how does M. de Villefort bear it?"

　　"As usual. Like a philosopher." Danglars returned at thismoment alone. "Well," said the baroness, "do you leave M.Cavalcanti with your daughter?"

　　"And Mademoiselle d'Armilly," said the banker; "do youconsider her no one?" Then, turning to Monte Cristo, hesaid, "Prince Cavalcanti is a charming young man, is he not?But is he really a prince?"

　　"I will not answer for it," said Monte Cristo. "His fatherwas introduced to me as a marquis, so he ought to be acount; but I do not think he has much claim to that title."

　　"Why?" said the banker. "If he is a prince, he is wrong notto maintain his rank; I do not like any one to deny hisorigin."

　　"Oh, you are a thorough democrat," said Monte Cristo,smiling.

　　"But do you see to what you are exposing yourself?" said thebaroness. "If, perchance, M. de Morcerf came, he would findM. Cavalcanti in that room, where he, the betrothed ofEugenie, has never been admitted."

　　"You may well say, perchance," replied the banker; "for hecomes so seldom, it would seem only chance that brings him."

　　"But should he come and find that young man with yourdaughter, he might be displeased."

　　"He? You are mistaken. M. Albert would not do us the honorto be jealous; he does not like Eugenie sufficiently.Besides, I care not for his displeasure."

　　"Still, situated as we are" --

　　"Yes, do you know how we are situated? At his mother's ballhe danced once with Eugenie, and M. Cavalcanti three times,and he took no notice of it." The valet announced theVicomte Albert de Morcerf. The baroness rose hastily, andwas going into the study, when Danglars stopped her. "Lether alone," said he. She looked at him in amazement. MonteCristo appeared to be unconscious of what passed. Albertentered, looking very handsome and in high spirits. He bowedpolitely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, andaffectionately to Monte Cristo. Then turning to thebaroness: "May I ask how Mademoiselle Danglars is?" said he.

　　"She is quite well," replied Danglars quickly; "she is atthe piano with M. Cavalcanti." Albert retained his calm andindifferent manner; he might feel perhaps annoyed, but heknew Monte Cristo's eye was on him. "M. Cavalcanti has afine tenor voice," said he, "and Mademoiselle Eugenie asplendid soprano, and then she plays the piano likeThalberg. The concert must be a delightful one."

　　"They suit each other remarkably well," said Danglars.Albert appeared not to notice this remark, which was,however, so rude that Madame Danglars blushed.

　　"I, too," said the young man, "am a musician -- at least, mymasters used to tell me so; but it is strange that my voicenever would suit any other, and a soprano less than any."Danglars smiled, and seemed to say, "It is of noconsequence." Then, hoping doubtless to effect his purpose,he said, -- "The prince and my daughter were universallyadmired yesterday. You were not of the party, M. deMorcerf?"

　　"What prince?" asked Albert. "Prince Cavalcanti," saidDanglars, who persisted in giving the young man that title.

　　"Pardon me," said Albert, "I was not aware that he was aprince. And Prince Cavalcanti sang with Mademoiselle Eugenieyesterday? It must have been charming, indeed. I regret nothaving heard them. But I was unable to accept yourinvitation, having promised to accompany my mother to aGerman concert given by the Baroness of Chateau-Renaud."This was followed by rather an awkward silence. "May I alsobe allowed," said Morcerf, "to pay my respects toMademoiselle Danglars?" "Wait a moment," said the banker,stopping the young man; "do you hear that delightfulcavatina? Ta, ta, ta, ti, ta, ti, ta, ta; it is charming,let them finish -- one moment. Bravo, bravi, brava!" Thebanker was enthusiastic in his applause.

　　"Indeed," said Albert, "it is exquisite; it is impossible tounderstand the music of his country better than PrinceCavalcanti does. You said prince, did you not? But he caneasily become one, if he is not already; it is no uncommonthing in Italy. But to return to the charming musicians --you should give us a treat, Danglars, without telling themthere is a stranger. Ask them to sing one more song; it isso delightful to hear music in the distance, when themusicians are unrestrained by observation."

　　Danglars was quite annoyed by the young man's indifference.He took Monte Cristo aside. "What do you think of ourlover?" said he.

　　"He appears cool. But, then your word is given."

　　"Yes, doubtless I have promised to give my daughter to a manwho loves her, but not to one who does not. See him there,cold as marble and proud like his father. If he were rich,if he had Cavalcanti's fortune, that might be pardoned. Mafoi, I haven't consulted my daughter; but if she has goodtaste" --

　　"Oh," said Monte Cristo, "my fondness may blind me, but Iassure you I consider Morcerf a charming young man who willrender your daughter happy and will sooner or later attain acertain amount of distinction, and his father's position isgood."

　　"Hem," said Danglars.

　　"Why do you doubt?"

　　"The past -- that obscurity on the past."

　　"But that does not affect the son."

　　"Very true."

　　"Now, I beg of you, don't go off your head. It's a month nowthat you have been thinking of this marriage, and you mustsee that it throws some responsibility on me, for it was atmy house you met this young Cavalcanti, whom I do not reallyknow at all."

　　"But I do."

　　"Have you made inquiry?"

　　"Is there any need of that! Does not his appearance speakfor him? And he is very rich."

　　"I am not so sure of that."

　　"And yet you said he had money."

　　"Fifty thousand livres -- a mere trifle."

　　"He is well educated."

　　"Hem," said Monte Cristo in his turn.

　　"He is a musician."

　　"So are all Italians."

　　"Come, count, you do not do that young man justice."

　　"Well, I acknowledge it annoys me, knowing your connectionwith the Morcerf family, to see him throw himself in theway." Danglars burst out laughing. "What a Puritan you are!"said he; "that happens every day."

　　"But you cannot break it off in this way; the Morcerfs aredepending on this union."

　　"Indeed."

　　"Positively."

　　"Then let them explain themselves; you should give thefather a hint, you are so intimate with the family."

　　"I? -- where the devil did you find out that?"

　　"At their ball; it was apparent enough. Why, did not thecountess, the proud Mercedes, the disdainful Catalane, whowill scarcely open her lips to her oldest acquaintances,take your arm, lead you into the garden, into the privatewalks, and remain there for half an hour?"

　　"Ah, baron, baron," said Albert, "you are not listening --what barbarism in a melomaniac like you!"

　　"Oh, don't worry about me, Sir Mocker," said Danglars; thenturning to the count he said, "but will you undertake tospeak to the father?"

　　"Willingly, if you wish it."

　　"But let it be done explicitly and positively. If he demandsmy daughter let him fix the day -- declare his conditions;in short, let us either understand each other, or quarrel.You understand -- no more delay."

　　"Yes. sir, I will give my attention to the subject."

　　"I do not say that I await with pleasure his decision, but Ido await it. A banker must, you know, be a slave to hispromise." And Danglars sighed as M. Cavalcanti had done halfan hour before. "Bravi, bravo, brava!" cried Morcerf,parodying the banker, as the selection came to an end.Danglars began to look suspiciously at Morcerf, when someone came and whispered a few words to him. "I shall soonreturn," said the banker to Monte Cristo; "wait for me. Ishall, perhaps, have something to say to you." And he wentout.

　　The baroness took advantage of her husband's absence to pushopen the door of her daughter's study, and M. Andrea, whowas sitting before the piano with Mademoiselle Eugenie,started up like a jack-in-the-box. Albert bowed with a smileto Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear in the leastdisturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness.Cavalcanti was evidently embarrassed; he bowed to Morcerf,who replied with the most impertinent look possible. ThenAlbert launched out in praise of Mademoiselle Danglars'voice, and on his regret, after what he had just heard, thathe had been unable to be present the previous evening.Cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to Monte Cristo.

　　"Come," said Madame Danglars, "leave music and compliments,and let us go and take tea."

　　"Come, Louise," said Mademoiselle Danglars to her friend.They passed into the next drawing-room, where tea wasprepared. Just as they were beginning, in the Englishfashion, to leave the spoons in their cups, the door againopened and Danglars entered, visibly agitated. Monte Cristoobserved it particularly, and by a look asked the banker foran explanation. "I have just received my courier fromGreece," said Danglars.

　　"Ah, yes," said the count; "that was the reason of yourrunning away from us."

　　"Yes."

　　"How is King Otho getting on?" asked Albert in the mostsprightly tone. Danglars cast another suspicious looktowards him without answering, and Monte Cristo turned awayto conceal the expression of pity which passed over hisfeatures, but which was gone in a moment. "We shall gotogether, shall we not?" said Albert to the count.

　　"If you like," replied the latter. Albert could notunderstand the banker's look, and turning to Monte Cristo,who understood it perfectly, -- "Did you see," said he, "howhe looked at me?"

　　"Yes," said the count; "but did you think there was anythingparticular in his look?"

　　"Indeed, I did; and what does he mean by his news fromGreece?"

　　"How can I tell you?"

　　"Because I imagine you have correspondents in that country."Monte Cristo smiled significantly.

　　"Stop," said Albert, "here he comes. I shall complimentMademoiselle Danglars on her cameo, while the father talksto you."

　　"If you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, atleast," said Monte Cristo.

　　"No, every one would do that."

　　"My dear viscount, you are dreadfully impertinent." Albertadvanced towards Eugenie, smiling. Meanwhile, Danglars,stooping to Monte Cristo's ear, "Your advice was excellent,"said he; "there is a whole history connected with the namesFernand and Yanina."

　　"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Yes, I will tell you all; but take away the young man; Icannot endure his presence."

　　"He is going with me. Shall I send the father to you?"

　　"Immediately."

　　"Very well." The count made a sign to Albert and they bowedto the ladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectlyindifferent to Mademoiselle Danglars' contempt, Monte Cristoreiterating his advice to Madame Danglars on the prudence abanker's wife should exercise in providing for the future.M. Cavalcanti remained master of the field.

　　Chapter 77Haidee.

　　Scarcely had the count's horses cleared the angle of theboulevard, than Albert, turning towards the count, burstinto a loud fit of laughter -- much too loud in fact not togive the idea of its being rather forced and unnatural."Well," said he, "I will ask you the same question whichCharles IX. put to Catherine de Medicis, after the massacreof Saint Bartholomew, `How have I played my little part?'"

　　"To what do you allude?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"To the installation of my rival at M. Danglars'."

　　"What rival?"

　　"Ma foi, what rival? Why, your protege, M. AndreaCavalcanti!"

　　"Ah, no joking, viscount, if you please; I do not patronizeM. Andrea -- at least, not as concerns M. Danglars."

　　"And you would be to blame for not assisting him, if theyoung man really needed your help in that quarter, but,happily for me, he can dispense with it."

　　"What, do you think he is paying his addresses?"

　　"I am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulatedtones when addressing Mademoiselle Danglars fully proclaimhis intentions. He aspires to the hand of the proudEugenie."

　　"What does that signify, so long as they favor your suit?"

　　"But it is not the case, my dear count: on the contrary. Iam repulsed on all sides."

　　"What!"

　　"It is so indeed; Mademoiselle Eugenie scarcely answers me,and Mademoiselle d'Armilly, her confidant, does not speak tome at all."

　　"But the father has the greatest regard possible for you,"said Monte Cristo.

　　"He? Oh, no, he has plunged a thousand daggers into myheart, tragedy-weapons, I own, which instead of woundingsheathe their points in their own handles, but daggers whichhe nevertheless believed to be real and deadly."

　　"Jealousy indicates affection."

　　"True; but I am not jealous."

　　"He is."

　　"Of whom? -- of Debray?"

　　"No, of you."

　　"Of me? I will engage to say that before a week is past thedoor will be closed against me."

　　"You are mistaken, my dear viscount."

　　"Prove it to me."

　　"Do you wish me to do so?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, I am charged with the commission of endeavoring toinduce the Comte de Morcerf to make some definitearrangement with the baron."

　　"By whom are you charged?"

　　"By the baron himself."

　　"Oh," said Albert with all the cajolery of which he wascapable. "You surely will not do that, my dear count?"

　　"Certainly I shall, Albert, as I have promised to do it."

　　"Well," said Albert, with a sigh, "it seems you aredetermined to marry me."

　　"I am determined to try and be on good terms with everybody,at all events," said Monte Cristo. "But apropos of Debray,how is it that I have not seen him lately at the baron'shouse?"

　　"There has been a misunderstanding."

　　"What, with the baroness?"

　　"No, with the baron."

　　"Has he perceived anything?"

　　"Ah, that is a good joke!"

　　"Do you think he suspects?" said Monte Cristo with charmingartlessness.

　　"Where have you come from, my dear count?" said Albert.

　　"From Congo, if you will."

　　"It must be farther off than even that."

　　"But what do I know of your Parisian husbands?"

　　"Oh, my dear count, husbands are pretty much the sameeverywhere; an individual husband of any country is a prettyfair specimen of the whole race."

　　"But then, what can have led to the quarrel between Danglarsand Debray? They seemed to understand each other so well,"said Monte Cristo with renewed energy.

　　"Ah, now you are trying to penetrate into the mysteries ofIsis, in which I am not initiated. When M. Andrea Cavalcantihas become one of the family, you can ask him thatquestion." The carriage stopped. "Here we are," said MonteCristo; "it is only half-past ten o'clock, come in."

　　"Certainly I will."

　　"My carriage shall take you back."

　　"No, thank you; I gave orders for my coupe to follow me."

　　"There it is, then," said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out ofthe carriage. They both went into the house; thedrawing-room was lighted up -- they went in there. "You willmake tea for us, Baptistin," said the count. Baptistin leftthe room without waiting to answer, and in two secondsreappeared, bringing on a waiter all that his master hadordered, ready prepared, and appearing to have sprung fromthe ground, like the repasts which we read of in fairytales. "Really, my dear count," said Morcerf. "what I admirein you is, not so much your riches, for perhaps there arepeople even wealthier than yourself, nor is it only yourwit, for Beaumarchais might have possessed as much, -- butit is your manner of being served, without any questions, ina moment, in a second; it is as it they guessed what youwanted by your manner of ringing, and made a point ofkeeping everything you can possibly desire in constantreadiness."

　　"What you say is perhaps true; they know my habits. Forinstance, you shall see; how do you wish to occupy yourselfduring tea-time?"

　　"Ma foi, I should like to smoke."

　　Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once. In about thespace of a second a private door opened, and Ali appeared,bringing two chibouques filled with excellent latakia. "Itis quite wonderful," said Albert.

　　"Oh no, it is as simple as possible," replied Monte Cristo."Ali knows I generally smoke while I am taking my tea orcoffee; he has heard that I ordered tea, and he also knowsthat I brought you home with me; when I summoned him henaturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as he comesfrom a country where hospitality is especially manifestedthrough the medium of smoking, he naturally concludes thatwe shall smoke in company, and therefore brings twochibouques instead of one -- and now the mystery is solved."

　　"Certainly you give a most commonplace air to yourexplanation, but it is not the less true that you -- Ah, butwhat do I hear?" and Morcerf inclined his head towards thedoor, through which sounds seemed to issue resembling thoseof a guitar.

　　"Ma foi, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music thisevening; you have only escaped from Mademoiselle Danglars'piano, to be attacked by Haidee's guzla."

　　"Haidee -- what an adorable name! Are there, then, reallywomen who bear the name of Haidee anywhere but in Byron'spoems?"

　　"Certainly there are. Haidee is a very uncommon name inFrance, but is common enough in Albania and Epirus; it is asit you said, for example, Chastity, Modesty, Innocence, --it is a kind of baptismal name, as you Parisians call it."

　　"Oh, that is charming," said Albert, "how I should like tohear my countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness,Mademoiselle Silence, Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Onlythink, then, if Mademoiselle Danglars, instead of beingcalled Claire-Marie-Eugenie, had been named MademoiselleChastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect thatwould have produced on the announcement of her marriage!"

　　"Hush," said the count, "do not joke in so loud a tone;Haidee may hear you, perhaps."

　　"And you think she would be angry?"

　　"No, certainly not," said the count with a haughtyexpression.

　　"She is very amiable, then, is she not?" said Albert.

　　"It is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; a slavedoes not dictate to a master."

　　"Come; you are joking yourself now. Are there any moreslaves to be had who bear this beautiful name?"

　　"Undoubtedly."

　　"Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like otherpeople. The slave of the Count of Monte Cristo! Why, it is arank of itself in France, and from the way in which youlavish money, it is a place that must be worth a hundredthousand francs a year."

　　"A hundred thousand francs! The poor girl originallypossessed much more than that; she was born to treasures incomparison with which those recorded in the `Thousand andOne Nights' would seem but poverty."

　　"She must be a princess then."

　　"You are right; and she is one of the greatest in hercountry too."

　　"I thought so. But how did it happen that such a greatprincess became a slave?"

　　"How was it that Dionysius the Tyrant became a schoolmaster?The fortune of war, my dear viscount, -- the caprice offortune; that is the way in which these things are to beaccounted for."

　　"And is her name a secret?"

　　"As regards the generality of mankind it is; but not foryou, my dear viscount, who are one of my most intimatefriends, and on whose silence I feel I may rely, if Iconsider it necessary to enjoin it -- may I not do so?"

　　"Certainly; on my word of honor."

　　"You know the history of the pasha of Yanina, do you not?"

　　"Of Ali Tepelini?* Oh, yes; it was in his service that myfather made his fortune."

　　"True, I had forgotten that."

　　* Ali Pasha, "The Lion," was born at Tepelini, an Albanianvillage at the foot of the Klissoura Mountains, in 1741. Bydiplomacy and success in arms he became almost supreme rulerof Albania, Epirus, and adjacent territory. Having arousedthe enmity of the Sultan, he was proscribed and put to deathby treachery in 1822, at the age of eighty. -- Ed.

　　"Well, what is Haidee to Ali Tepelini?"

　　"Merely his daughter."

　　"What? the daughter of Ali Pasha?"

　　"Of Ali Pasha and the beautiful Vasiliki."

　　"And your slave?"

　　"Ma foi, yes."

　　"But how did she become so?"

　　"Why, simply from the circumstance of my having bought herone day, as I was passing through the market atConstantinople."

　　"Wonderful! Really, my dear count, you seem to throw a sortof magic influence over all in which you are concerned; whenI listen to you, existence no longer seems reality, but awaking dream. Now, I am perhaps going to make an imprudentand thoughtless request, but" --

　　"Say on."

　　"But, since you go out with Haidee, and sometimes even takeher to the opera" --

　　"Well?"

　　"I think I may venture to ask you this favor."

　　"You may venture to ask me anything."

　　"Well then, my dear count, present me to your princess."

　　"I will do so; but on two conditions."

　　"I accept them at once."

　　"The first is, that you will never tell any one that I havegranted the interview."

　　"Very well," said Albert, extending his hand; "I swear Iwill not."

　　"The second is, that you will not tell her that your fatherever served hers."

　　"I give you my oath that I will not."

　　"Enough, viscount; you will remember those two vows, willyou not? But I know you to be a man of honor." The countagain struck the gong. Ali reappeared. "Tell Haidee," saidhe, "that I will take coffee with her, and give her tounderstand that I desire permission to present one of myfriends to her." Ali bowed and left the room. "Now,understand me," said the count, "no direct questions, mydear Morcerf; if you wish to know anything, tell me, and Iwill ask her."

　　"Agreed." Ali reappeared for the third time, and drew backthe tapestried hanging which concealed the door, to signifyto his master and Albert that they were at liberty to passon. "Let us go in," said Monte Cristo.

　　Albert passed his hand through his hair, and curled hismustache, then, having satisfied himself as to his personalappearance, followed the count into the room, the latterhaving previously resumed his hat and gloves. Ali wasstationed as a kind of advanced guard, and the door was keptby the three French attendants, commanded by Myrtho. Haideewas awaiting her visitors in the first room of herapartments, which was the drawing-room. Her large eyes weredilated with surprise and expectation, for it was the firsttime that any man, except Monte Cristo, had been accorded anentrance into her presence. She was sitting on a sofa placedin an angle of the room, with her legs crossed under her inthe Eastern fashion, and seemed to have made for herself, asit were, a kind of nest in the rich Indian silks whichenveloped her. Near her was the instrument on which she hadjust been playing; it was elegantly fashioned, and worthy ofits mistress. On perceiving Monte Cristo, she arose andwelcomed him with a smile peculiar to herself, expressive atonce of the most implicit obedience and also of the deepestlove. Monte Cristo advanced towards her and extended hishand, which she as usual raised to her lips.

　　Albert had proceeded no farther than the door, where heremained rooted to the spot, being completely fascinated bythe sight of such surpassing beauty, beheld as it was forthe first time, and of which an inhabitant of more northernclimes could form no adequate idea.

　　"Whom do you bring?" asked the young girl in Romaic, ofMonte Cristo; "is it a friend, a brother, a simpleacquaintance, or an enemy."

　　"A friend," said Monte Cristo in the same language.

　　"What is his name?"

　　"Count Albert; it is the same man whom I rescued from thehands of the banditti at Rome."

　　"In what language would you like me to converse with him?"

　　Monte Cristo turned to Albert. "Do you know modern Greek,"asked he.

　　"Alas, no," said Albert; "nor even ancient Greek, my dearcount; never had Homer or Plato a more unworthy scholar thanmyself."

　　"Then," said Haidee, proving by her remark that she hadquite understood Monte Cristo's question and Albert'sanswer, "then I will speak either in French or Italian, ifmy lord so wills it."

　　Monte Cristo reflected one instant. "You will speak inItalian," said he. Then, turning towards Albert, -- "It is apity you do not understand either ancient or modern Greek,both of which Haidee speaks so fluently; the poor child willbe obliged to talk to you in Italian, which will give youbut a very false idea of her powers of conversation." Thecount made a sign to Haidee to address his visitor. "Sir,"she said to Morcerf, "you are most welcome as the friend ofmy lord and master." This was said in excellent Tuscan, andwith that soft Roman accent which makes the language ofDante as sonorous as that of Homer. Then, turning to Ali,she directed him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he hadleft the room to execute the orders of his young mistressshe beckoned Albert to approach nearer to her. Monte Cristoand Morcerf drew their seats towards a small table, on whichwere arranged music, drawings, and vases of flowers. Alithen entered bringing coffee and chibouques; as to M.Baptistin, this portion of the building was interdicted tohim. Albert refused the pipe which the Nubian offered him."Oh, take it -- take it," said the count; "Haidee is almostas civilized as a Parisian; the smell of an Havana isdisagreeable to her, but the tobacco of the East is a mostdelicious perfume, you know."

　　Ali left the room. The cups of coffee were all prepared,with the addition of sugar, which had been brought forAlbert. Monte Cristo and Haidee took the beverage in theoriginal Arabian manner, that is to say, without sugar.Haidee took the porcelain cup in her little slender fingersand conveyed it to her mouth with all the innocentartlessness of a child when eating or drinking somethingwhich it likes. At this moment two women entered, bringingsalvers filled with ices and sherbet, which they placed ontwo small tables appropriated to that purpose. "My dearhost, and you, signora," said Albert, in Italian, "excuse myapparent stupidity. I am quite bewildered, and it is naturalthat it should be so. Here I am in the heart of Paris; but amoment ago I heard the rumbling of the omnibuses and thetinkling of the bells of the lemonade-sellers, and now Ifeel as if I were suddenly transported to the East; not suchas I have seen it, but such as my dreams have painted it.Oh, signora, if I could but speak Greek, your conversation,added to the fairy-scene which surrounds me, would furnishan evening of such delight as it would be impossible for meever to forget."

　　"I speak sufficient Italian to enable me to converse withyou, sir," said Haidee quietly; "and if you like what isEastern, I will do my best to secure the gratification ofyour tastes while you are here."

　　"On what subject shall I converse with her?" said Albert, ina low tone to Monte Cristo.

　　"Just what you please; you may speak of her country and ofher youthful reminiscences, or if you like it better you cantalk of Rome, Naples, or Florence."

　　"Oh," said Albert, "it is of no use to be in the company ofa Greek if one converses just in the same style as with aParisian; let me speak to her of the East."

　　"Do so then, for of all themes which you could choose thatwill be the most agreeable to her taste." Albert turnedtowards Haidee. "At what age did you leave Greece, signora?"asked he.

　　"I left it when I was but five years old," replied Haidee.

　　"And have you any recollection of your country?"

　　"When I shut my eyes and think, I seem to see it all again.The mind can see as well as the body. The body forgetssometimes -- but the mind never forgets."

　　"And how far back into the past do your recollectionsextend?"

　　"I could scarcely walk when my mother, who was calledVasiliki, which means royal," said the young girl, tossingher head proudly, "took me by the hand, and after putting inour purse all the money we possessed, we went out, bothcovered with veils, to solicit alms for the prisoners,saying, `He who giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord.'Then when our purse was full we returned to the palace, andwithout saying a word to my father, we sent it to theconvent, where it was divided amongst the prisoners."

　　"And how old were you at that time?"

　　"I was three years old," said Haidee.

　　"Then you remember everything that went on about you fromthe time when you were three years old?" said Albert.

　　"Everything."

　　"Count," said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, "doallow the signora to tell me something of her history. Youprohibited my mentioning my father's name to her, butperhaps she will allude to him of her own accord in thecourse of the recital, and you have no idea how delighted Ishould be to hear our name pronounced by such beautifullips." Monte Cristo turned to Haidee, and with an expressionof countenance which commanded her to pay the most implicitattention to his words, he said in Greek, -- "Tell us thefate of your father; but neither the name of the traitor northe treason." Haidee sighed deeply, and a shade of sadnessclouded her beautiful brow.

　　"What are you saying to her?" said Morcerf in an undertone.

　　"I again reminded her that you were a friend, and that sheneed not conceal anything from you."

　　"Then," said Albert, "this pious pilgrimage in behalf of theprisoners was your first remembrance; what is the next?"

　　"Oh, then I remember as if it were but yesterday sittingunder the shade of some sycamore-trees, on the borders of alake, in the waters of which the trembling foliage wasreflected as in a mirror. Under the oldest and thickest ofthese trees, reclining on cushions, sat my father; my motherwas at his feet, and I, childlike, amused myself by playingwith his long white beard which descended to his girdle, orwith the diamond-hilt of the scimitar attached to hisgirdle. Then from time to time there came to him an Albanianwho said something to which I paid no attention, but whichhe always answered in the same tone of voice, either `Kill,'or `Pardon.'"

　　"It is very strange," said Albert, "to hear such wordsproceed from the mouth of any one but an actress on thestage, and one needs constantly to be saying to one's self,`This is no fiction, it is all reality,' in order to believeit. And how does France appear in your eyes, accustomed asthey have been to gaze on such enchanted scenes?"

　　"I think it is a fine country," said Haidee, "but I seeFrance as it really is, because I look on it with the eyesof a woman; whereas my own country, which I can only judgeof from the impression produced on my childish mind, alwaysseems enveloped in a vague atmosphere, which is luminous orotherwise, according as my remembrances of it are sad orjoyous."

　　"So young," said Albert, forgetting at the moment theCount's command that he should ask no questions of the slaveherself, "is it possible that you can have known whatsuffering is except by name?"

　　Haidee turned her eyes towards Monte Cristo, who, making atthe same time some imperceptible sign, murmured, -- "Go on."

　　"Nothing is ever so firmly impressed on the mind as thememory of our early childhood, and with the exception of thetwo scenes I have just described to you, all my earliestreminiscences are fraught with deepest sadness."

　　"Speak, speak, signora," said Albert, "I am listening withthe most intense delight and interest to all you say."

　　Haidee answered his remark with a melancholy smile. "Youwish me, then, to relate the history of my past sorrows?"said she.

　　"I beg you to do so," replied Albert.

　　"Well, I was but four years old when one night I wassuddenly awakened by my mother. We were in the palace ofYanina; she snatched me from the cushions on which I wassleeping, and on opening my eyes I saw hers filled withtears. She took me away without speaking. When I saw herweeping I began to cry too. `Hush, child!' said she. Atother times in spite of maternal endearments or threats, Ihad with a child's caprice been accustomed to indulge myfeelings of sorrow or anger by crying as much as I feltinclined; but on this occasion there was an intonation ofsuch extreme terror in my mother's voice when she enjoinedme to silence, that I ceased crying as soon as her commandwas given. She bore me rapidly away.

　　"I saw then that we were descending a large staircase;around us were all my mother's servants carrying trunks,bags, ornaments, jewels, purses of gold, with which theywere hurrying away in the greatest distraction.

　　"Behind the women came a guard of twenty men armed with longguns and pistols, and dressed in the costume which theGreeks have assumed since they have again become a nation.You may imagine there was something startling and ominous,"said Haidee, shaking her head and turning pale at the mereremembrance of the scene, "in this long file of slaves andwomen only half-aroused from sleep, or at least so theyappeared to me, who was myself scarcely awake. Here andthere on the walls of the staircase, were reflected giganticshadows, which trembled in the flickering light of thepine-torches till they seemed to reach to the vaulted roofabove.

　　"`Quick!' said a voice at the end of the gallery. This voicemade every one bow before it, resembling in its effect thewind passing over a field of wheat, by its superior strengthforcing every ear to yield obeisance. As for me, it made metremble. This voice was that of my father. He came last,clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his hand thecarbine which your emperor presented him. He was leaning onthe shoulder of his favorite Selim, and he drove us allbefore him, as a shepherd would his straggling flock. Myfather," said Haidee, raising her head, "was thatillustrious man known in Europe under the name of AliTepelini, pasha of Yanina, and before whom Turkey trembled."

　　Albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these wordspronounced with such a haughty and dignified accent; itappeared to him as if there was something supernaturallygloomy and terrible in the expression which gleamed from thebrilliant eyes of Haidee at this moment; she appeared like aPythoness evoking a spectre, as she recalled to his mind theremembrance of the fearful death of this man, to the news ofwhich all Europe had listened with horror. "Soon," saidHaidee, "we halted on our march, and found ourselves on theborders of a lake. My mother pressed me to her throbbingheart, and at the distance of a few paces I saw my father,who was glancing anxiously around. Four marble steps leddown to the water's edge, and below them was a boat floatingon the tide.

　　"From where we stood I could see in the middle of the lake alarge blank mass; it was the kiosk to which we were going.This kiosk appeared to me to be at a considerable distance,perhaps on account of the darkness of the night, whichprevented any object from being more than partiallydiscerned. We stepped into the boat. I remember well thatthe oars made no noise whatever in striking the water, andwhen I leaned over to ascertain the cause I saw that theywere muffled with the sashes of our Palikares.* Besides therowers, the boat contained only the women, my father,mother, Selim, and myself. The Palikares had remained on theshore of the lake, ready to cover our retreat; they werekneeling on the lowest of the marble steps, and in thatmanner intended making a rampart of the three others, incase of pursuit. Our bark flew before the wind. `Why doesthe boat go so fast?' asked I of my mother.

　　* Greek militiamen in the war for independence. -- Ed.

　　"`Silence, child! Hush, we are flying!' I did notunderstand. Why should my father fly? -- he, theall-powerful -- he, before whom others were accustomed tofly -- he, who had taken for his device, `They hate me; thenthey fear me!' It was, indeed, a flight which my father wastrying to effect. I have been told since that the garrisonof the castle of Yanina, fatigued with long service" --

　　Here Haidee cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whoseeyes had been riveted on her countenance during the wholecourse of her narrative. The young girl then continued,speaking slowly, like a person who is either inventing orsuppressing some feature of the history which he isrelating. "You were saying, signora," said Albert, who waspaying the most implicit attention to the recital, "that thegarrison of Yanina, fatigued with long service" --

　　"Had treated with the Serasker* Koorshid, who had been sentby the sultan to gain possession of the person of my father;it was then that Ali Tepelini -- after having sent to thesultan a French officer in whom he reposed great confidence-- resolved to retire to the asylum which he had long beforeprepared for himself, and which he called kataphygion, orthe refuge."

　　"And this officer," asked Albert, "do you remember his name,signora?" Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with theyoung girl, which was quite unperceived by Albert. "No,"said she, "I do not remember it just at this moment; but ifit should occur to me presently, I will tell you." Albertwas on the point of pronouncing his father's name, whenMonte Cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach;the young man recollected his promise, and was silent.

　　* A Turkish pasha in command of the troops of a province. --Ed.

　　"It was towards this kiosk that we were rowing. Aground-floor, ornamented with arabesques, bathing itsterraces in the water, and another floor, looking on thelake, was all which was visible to the eye. But beneath theground-floor, stretching out into the island, was a largesubterranean cavern, to which my mother, myself, and thewomen were conducted. In this place were together 60,000pouches and 200 barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000 ofmoney in gold, and the barrels were filled with 30,000pounds of gunpowder.

　　"Near the barrels stood Selim, my father's favorite, whom Imentioned to you just now. He stood watch day and night witha lance provided with a lighted slowmatch in his hand, andhe had orders to blow up everything -- kiosk, guards, women,gold, and Ali Tepelini himself -- at the first signal givenby my father. I remember well that the slaves, convinced ofthe precarious tenure on which they held their lives, passedwhole days and nights in praying, crying, and groaning. Asfor me, I can never forget the pale complexion and blackeyes of the young soldier, and whenever the angel of deathsummons me to another world, I am quite sure I shallrecognize Selim. I cannot tell you how long we remained inthis state; at that period I did not even know what timemeant. Sometimes, but very rarely, my father summoned me andmy mother to the terrace of the palace; these were hours ofrecreation for me, as I never saw anything in the dismalcavern but the gloomy countenances of the slaves and Selim'sfiery lance. My father was endeavoring to pierce with hiseager looks the remotest verge of the horizon, examiningattentively every black speck which appeared on the lake,while my mother, reclining by his side, rested her head onhis shoulder, and I played at his feet, admiring everythingI saw with that unsophisticated innocence of childhood whichthrows a charm round objects insignificant in themselves,but which in its eyes are invested with the greatestimportance. The heights of Pindus towered above us; thecastle of Yanina rose white and angular from the blue watersof the lake, and the immense masses of black vegetationwhich, viewed in the distance, gave the idea of lichensclinging to the rocks, were in reality gigantic fir-treesand myrtles.

　　"One morning my father sent for us; my mother had beencrying all the night, and was very wretched; we found thepasha calm, but paler than usual. `Take courage, Vasiliki,'said he; `to-day arrives the firman of the master, and myfate will be decided. If my pardon be complete, we shallreturn triumphant to Yanina; if the news be inauspicious, wemust fly this night.' -- `But supposing our enemy should notallow us to do so?' said my mother. `Oh, make yourself easyon that head,' said Ali, smiling; `Selim and his flaminglance will settle that matter. They would be glad to see medead, but they would not like themselves to die with me.'

　　"My mother only answered by sighs to consolations which sheknew did not come from my father's heart. She prepared theiced water which he was in the habit of constantly drinking,-- for since his sojourn at the kiosk he had been parched bythe most violent fever, -- after which she anointed hiswhite beard with perfumed oil, and lighted his chibouque,which he sometimes smoked for hours together, quietlywatching the wreaths of vapor that ascended in spiral cloudsand gradually melted away in the surrounding atmosphere.Presently he made such a sudden movement that I wasparalyzed with fear. Then, without taking his eyes from theobject which had first attracted his attention, he asked forhis telescope. My mother gave it him. and as she did so,looked whiter than the marble against which she leaned. Isaw my father's hand tremble. `A boat! -- two! -- three!'murmured my, father; -- `four!' He then arose, seizing hisarms and priming his pistols. `Vasiliki,' said he to mymother, trembling perceptibly, `the instant approaches whichwill decide everything. In the space of half an hour weshall know the emperor's answer. Go into the cavern withHaidee.' -- `I will not quit you,' said Vasiliki; `if youdie, my lord, I will die with you.' -- `Go to Selim!' criedmy father. `Adieu, my lord,' murmured my mother, determiningquietly to await the approach of death. `Take awayVasiliki!' said my father to his Palikares.

　　"As for me, I had been forgotten in the general confusion; Iran toward Ali Tepelini; he saw me hold out my arms to him,and he stooped down and pressed my forehead with his lips.Oh, how distinctly I remember that kiss! -- it was the lasthe ever gave me, and I feel as if it were still warm on myforehead. On descending, we saw through the lattice-workseveral boats which were gradually becoming more distinct toour view. At first they appeared like black specks, and nowthey looked like birds skimming the surface of the waves.During this time, in the kiosk at my father's feet, wereseated twenty Palikares, concealed from view by an angle ofthe wall and watching with eager eyes the arrival of theboats. They were armed with their long guns inlaid withmother-of-pearl and silver, and cartridges in great numberswere lying scattered on the floor. My father looked at hiswatch, and paced up and down with a countenance expressiveof the greatest anguish. This was the scene which presenteditself to my view as I quitted my father after that lastkiss. My mother and I traversed the gloomy passage leadingto the cavern. Selim was still at his post, and smiled sadlyon us as we entered. We fetched our cushions from the otherend of the cavern, and sat down by Selim. In great dangersthe devoted ones cling to each other; and, young as I was, Iquite understood that some imminent danger was hanging overour heads."

　　Albert had often heard -- not from his father, for he neverspoke on the subject, but from strangers -- the descriptionof the last moments of the vizier of Yanina; he had readdifferent accounts of his death, but the story seemed toacquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of theyoung girl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholyexpression of her countenance at once charmed and horrifiedhim. As to Haidee, these terrible reminiscences seemed tohave overpowered her for a moment, for she ceased speaking,her head leaning on her hand like a beautiful flower bowingbeneath the violence of the storm; and her eyes gazing onvacancy indicated that she was mentally contemplating thegreen summit of the Pindus and the blue waters of the lakeof Yanina, which, like a magic mirror, seemed to reflect thesombre picture which she sketched. Monte Cristo looked ather with an indescribable expression of interest and pity.

　　"Go on," said the count in the Romaic language.

　　Haidee looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of MonteCristo's voice had awakened her from a dream; and sheresumed her narrative. "It was about four o'clock in theafternoon, and although the day was brilliant out-of-doors,we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of the cavern. Onesingle, solitary light was burning there, and it appearedlike a star set in a heaven of blackness; it was Selim'sflaming lance. My mother was a Christian, and she prayed.Selim repeated from time to time the sacred words: `God isgreat!' However, my mother had still some hope. As she wascoming down, she thought she recognized the French officerwho had been sent to Constantinople, and in whom my fatherplaced so much confidence; for he knew that all the soldiersof the French emperor were naturally noble and generous. Sheadvanced some steps towards the staircase, and listened.`They are approaching,' said she; `perhaps they bring uspeace and liberty!' -- `What do you fear, Vasiliki?' saidSelim, in a voice at once so gentle and yet so proud. `Ifthey do not bring us peace, we will give them war; if theydo not bring life, we will give them death.' And he renewedthe flame of his lance with a gesture which made one thinkof Dionysus of Crete.* But I, being only a little child, wasterrified by this undaunted courage, which appeared to meboth ferocious and senseless, and I recoiled with horrorfrom the idea of the frightful death amidst fire and flameswhich probably awaited us.

　　* The god of fruitfulness in Grecian mythology. In Crete hewas supposed to be slain in winter with the decay ofvegetation and to revive in the spring. Haidee's learnedreference is to the behavior of an actor in the Dionysianfestivals. -- Ed.

　　"My mother experienced the same sensations, for I felt hertremble. `Mamma, mamma,' said I, `are we really to bekilled?' And at the sound of my voice the slaves redoubledtheir cries and prayers and lamentations. `My child,' saidVasiliki, `may God preserve you from ever wishing for thatdeath which to-day you so much dread!' Then, whispering toSelim, she asked what were her master's orders. `If he sendme his poniard, it will signify that the emperor'sintentions are not favorable, and I am to set fire to thepowder; if, on the contrary, he send me his ring, it will bea sign that the emperor pardons him, and I am to extinguishthe match and leave the magazine untouched.' -- `My friend,'said my mother, `when your master's orders arrive, if it isthe poniard which he sends, instead of despatching us bythat horrible death which we both so much dread, you willmercifully kill us with this same poniard, will you not?' --`Yes, Vasiliki,' replied Selim tranquilly.

　　"Suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discernedthat they were cries of joy. The name of the French officerwho had been sent to Constantinople resounded on all sidesamongst our Palikares; it was evident that he brought theanswer of the emperor, and that it was favorable."

　　"And do you not remember the Frenchman's name?" saidMorcerf, quite ready to aid the memory of the narrator.Monte Cristo made a sign to him to be silent.

　　"I do not recollect it," said Haidee.

　　"The noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearerand nearer: they were descending the steps leading to thecavern. Selim made ready his lance. Soon a figure appearedin the gray twilight at the entrance of the cave, formed bythe reflection of the few rays of daylight which had foundtheir way into this gloomy retreat. `Who are you?' criedSelim. `But whoever you may be, I charge you not to advanceanother step.' -- `Long live the emperor!' said the figure.`He grants a full pardon to the Vizier Ali, and not onlygives him his life, but restores to him his fortune and hispossessions.' My mother uttered a cry of joy, and clasped meto her bosom. `Stop,' said Selim, seeing that she was aboutto go out; you see I have not yet received the ring,' --`True,' said my mother. And she fell on her knees, at thesame time holding me up towards heaven, as if she desired,while praying to God in my behalf, to raise me actually tohis presence."

　　And for the second time Haidee stopped, overcome by suchviolent emotion that the perspiration stood upon her palebrow, and her stifled voice seemed hardly able to findutterance, so parched and dry were her throat and lips.Monte Cristo poured a little iced water into a glass, andpresented it to her, saying with a mildness in which wasalso a shade of command, -- "Courage."

　　Haidee dried her eyes, and continued: "By this time oureyes, habituated to the darkness, had recognized themessenger of the pasha, -- it was a friend. Selim had alsorecognized him, but the brave young man only acknowledgedone duty, which was to obey. `In whose name do you come?'said he to him. `I come in the name of our master, AliTepelini.' -- `If you come from Ali himself,' said Selim,`you know what you were charged to remit to me?' -- `Yes,'said the messenger, `and I bring you his ring.' At thesewords he raised his hand above his head, to show the token;but it was too far off, and there was not light enough toenable Selim, where he was standing, to distinguish andrecognize the object presented to his view. `I do not seewhat you have in your hand,' said Selim. `Approach then,'said the messenger, `or I will come nearer to you, if youprefer it.' -- `I will agree to neither one nor the other,'replied the young soldier; `place the object which I desireto see in the ray of light which shines there, and retirewhile I examine it.' -- `Be it so,' said the envoy; and heretired, after having first deposited the token agreed on inthe place pointed out to him by Selim.

　　"Oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem tobe a ring which was placed there. But was it my father'sring? that was the question. Selim, still holding in hishand the lighted match, walked towards the opening in thecavern, and, aided by the faint light which streamed inthrough the mouth of the cave, picked up the token.

　　"`It is well,' said he, kissing it; `it is my master'sring!' And throwing the match on the ground, he trampled onit and extinguished it. The messenger uttered a cry of joyand clapped his hands. At this signal four soldiers of theSerasker Koorshid suddenly appeared, and Selim fell, piercedby five blows. Each man had stabbed him separately, and,intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear,they sought all over the cavern to discover if there was anyfear of fire, after which they amused themselves by rollingon the bags of gold. At this moment my mother seized me inher arms, and hurrying noiselessly along numerous turningsand windings known only to ourselves, she arrived at aprivate staircase of the kiosk, where was a scene offrightful tumult and confusion. The lower rooms wereentirely filled with Koorshid's troops; that is to say, withour enemies. Just as my mother was on the point of pushingopen a small door, we heard the voice of the pasha soundingin a loud and threatening tone. My mother applied her eye tothe crack between the boards; I luckily found a smallopening which afforded me a view of the apartment and whatwas passing within. `What do you want?' said my father tosome people who were holding a paper inscribed withcharacters of gold. `What we want,' replied one, `is tocommunicate to you the will of his highness. Do you see thisfirman?' -- `I do,' said my father. `Well, read it; hedemands your head.'

　　"My father answered with a loud laugh, which was morefrightful than even threats would have been, and he had notceased when two reports of a pistol were heard; he had firedthem himself, and had killed two men. The Palikares, whowere prostrated at my father's feet, now sprang up andfired, and the room was filled with fire and smoke. At thesame instant the firing began on the other side, and theballs penetrated the boards all round us. Oh, how noble didthe grand vizier my father look at that moment, in the midstof the flying bullets, his scimitar in his hand, and hisface blackened with the powder of his enemies! and how heterrified them, even then, and made them fly before him!`Selim, Selim!' cried he, `guardian of the fire, do yourduty!' -- `Selim is dead,' replied a voice which seemed tocome from the depths of the earth, `and you are lost, Ali!'At the same moment an explosion was heard, and the flooringof the room in which my father was sitting was suddenly tornup and shivered to atoms -- the troops were firing fromunderneath. Three or four Palikares fell with their bodiesliterally ploughed with wounds.

　　"My father howled aloud, plunged his fingers into the holeswhich the balls had made, and tore up one of the planksentire. But immediately through this opening twenty moreshots were fired, and the flame, rushing up like fire fromthe crater of a volcano, soon reached the tapestry, which itquickly devoured. In the midst of all this frightful tumultand these terrific cries, two reports, fearfully distinct,followed by two shrieks more heartrending than all, froze mewith terror. These two shots had mortally wounded my father,and it was he who had given utterance to these frightfulcries. However, he remained standing, clinging to a window.My mother tried to force the door, that she might go and diewith him, but it was fastened on the inside. All around himwere lying the Palikares, writhing in convulsive agonies,while two or three who were only slightly wounded weretrying to escape by springing from the windows. At thiscrisis the whole flooring suddenly gave way. my father fellon one knee, and at the same moment twenty hands were thrustforth, armed with sabres, pistols, and poniards -- twentyblows were instantaneously directed against one man, and myfather disappeared in a whirlwind of fire and smoke kindledby these demons, and which seemed like hell itself openingbeneath his feet. I felt myself fall to the ground, mymother had fainted."

　　Haidee's arms fell by her side, and she uttered a deepgroan, at the same time looking towards the count as if toask if he were satisfied with her obedience to his commands.Monte Cristo arose and approached her, took her hand, andsaid to her in Romaic, "Calm yourself, my dear child, andtake courage in remembering that there is a God who willpunish traitors."

　　"It is a frightful story, count," said Albert, terrified atthe paleness of Haidee's countenance, "and I reproach myselfnow for having been so cruel and thoughtless in my request."

　　"Oh, it is nothing," said Monte Cristo. Then, patting theyoung girl on the head, he continued, "Haidee is verycourageous, and she sometimes even finds consolation in therecital of her misfortunes."

　　"Because, my lord." said Haidee eagerly, "my miseries recallto me the remembrance of your goodness."

　　Albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yetrelated what he most desired to know, -- how she had becomethe slave of the count. Haidee saw at a glance the sameexpression pervading the countenances of her two auditors;she exclaimed, `When my mother recovered her senses we werebefore the serasker. `Kill,' said she, `but spare the honorof the widow of Ali.' -- `It is not to me to whom you mustaddress yourself,' said Koorshid.

　　"`To whom, then?' -- `To your new master.'

　　"`Who and where is he?' -- `He is here.'

　　"And Koorshid pointed out one who had more than anycontributed to the death of my father," said Haidee, in atone of chastened anger. "Then," said Albert, "you becamethe property of this man?"

　　"No," replied Haidee, "he did not dare to keep us, so wewere sold to some slave-merchants who were going toConstantinople. We traversed Greece, and arrived half deadat the imperial gates. They were surrounded by a crowd ofpeople, who opened a way for us to pass, when suddenly mymother, having looked closely at an object which wasattracting their attention, uttered a piercing cry and fellto the ground, pointing as she did so to a head which wasplaced over the gates, and beneath which were inscribedthese words:

　　"`This is the head of Ali Tepelini Pasha of Yanina.' I criedbitterly, and tried to raise my mother from the earth, butshe was dead! I was taken to the slave-market, and waspurchased by a rich Armenian. He caused me to be instructed,gave me masters, and when I was thirteen years of age hesold me to the Sultan Mahmood."

　　"Of whom I bought her," said Monte Cristo, "as I told you,Albert, with the emerald which formed a match to the one Ihad made into a box for the purpose of holding my hashishpills."

　　"Oh, you are good, you are great, my lord!" said Haidee,kissing the count's hand, "and I am very fortunate inbelonging to such a master!" Albert remained quitebewildered with all that he had seen and heard. "Come,finish your cup of coffee," said Monte Cristo; "the historyis ended."

　　Chapter 78We hear From Yanina.

　　If Valentine could have seen the trembling step and agitatedcountenance of Franz when he quitted the chamber of M.Noirtier, even she would have been constrained to pity him.Villefort had only just given utterance to a few incoherentsentences, and then retired to his study, where he receivedabout two hours afterwards the following letter: --

　　"After all the disclosures which were made this morning, M.Noirtier de Villefort must see the utter impossibility ofany alliance being formed between his family and that of M.Franz d'Epinay. M. d'Epinay must say that he is shocked andastonished that M. de Villefort, who appeared to be aware ofall the circumstances detailed this morning, should not haveanticipated him in this announcement."

　　No one who had seen the magistrate at this moment, sothoroughly unnerved by the recent inauspicious combinationof circumstances, would have supposed for an instant that hehad anticipated the annoyance; although it certainly neverhad occurred to him that his father would carry candor, orrather rudeness, so far as to relate such a history. And injustice to Villefort, it must be understood that M.Noirtier, who never cared for the opinion of his son on anysubject, had always omitted to explain the affair toVillefort, so that he had all his life entertained thebelief that General de Quesnel, or the Baron d'Epinay, as hewas alternately styled, according as the speaker wished toidentify him by his own family name, or by the title whichhad been conferred on him, fell the victim of assassination,and not that he was killed fairly in a duel. This harshletter, coming as it did from a man generally so polite andrespectful, struck a mortal blow at the pride of Villefort.Hardly had he read the letter, when his wife entered. Thesudden departure of Franz, after being summoned by M.Noirtier, had so much astonished every one, that theposition of Madame de Villefort, left alone with the notaryand the witnesses, became every moment more embarrassing.Determined to bear it no longer, she arose and left theroom; saying she would go and make some inquiries into thecause of his sudden disappearance.

　　M. de Villefort's communications on the subject were verylimited and concise; he told her, in fact, that anexplanation had taken place between M. Noirtier, M.d'Epinay, and himself, and that the marriage of Valentineand Franz would consequently be broken off. This was anawkward and unpleasant thing to have to report to those whowere awaiting her return in the chamber of herfather-in-law. She therefore contented herself with sayingthat M. Noirtier having at the commencement of thediscussion been attacked by a sort of apoplectic fit, theaffair would necessarily be deferred for some days longer.This news, false as it was following so singularly in thetrain of the two similar misfortunes which had so recentlyoccurred, evidently astonished the auditors, and theyretired without a word. During this time Valentine, at onceterrified and happy, after having embraced and thanked thefeeble old man for thus breaking with a single blow thechain which she had been accustomed to consider asirrefragable, asked leave to retire to her own room, inorder to recover her composure. Noirtier looked thepermission which she solicited. But instead of going to herown room, Valentine, having once gained her liberty, enteredthe gallery, and, opening a small door at the end of it.found herself at once in the garden.

　　In the midst of all the strange events which had crowded oneon the other, an indefinable sentiment of dread had takenpossession of Valentine's mind. She expected every momentthat she should see Morrel appear, pale and trembling, toforbid the signing of the contract, like the Laird ofRavenswood in "The Bride of Lammermoor." It was high timefor her to make her appearance at the gate, for Maximilianhad long awaited her coming. He had half guessed what wasgoing on when he saw Franz quit the cemetery with M. deVillefort. He followed M. d'Epinay, saw him enter,afterwards go out, and then re-enter with Albert andChateau-Renaud. He had no longer any doubts as to the natureof the conference; he therefore quickly went to the gate inthe clover-patch, prepared to hear the result of theproceedings, and very certain that Valentine would hasten tohim the first moment she should he set at liberty. He wasnot mistaken; peering through the crevices of the woodenpartition, he soon discovered the young girl, who cast asideall her usual precautions and walked at once to the barrier.The first glance which Maximilian directed towards herentirely reassured him, and the first words she spoke madehis heart bound with delight.

　　"We are saved!" said Valentine. "Saved?" repeated Morrel,not being able to conceive such intense happiness; "bywhom?"

　　"By my grandfather. Oh, Morrel, pray love him for all hisgoodness to us!" Morrel swore to love him with all his soul;and at that moment he could safely promise to do so, for hefelt as though it were not enough to love him merely as afriend or even as a father. "But tell me, Valentine, how hasit all been effected? What strange means has he used tocompass this blessed end?"

　　Valentine was on the point of relating all that had passed,but she suddenly remembered that in doing so she must reveala terrible secret which concerned others as well as hergrandfather, and she said, "At some future time I will tellyou all about it."

　　"But when will that be?"

　　"When I am your wife."

　　The conversation had now turned upon a topic so pleasing toMorrel, that he was ready to accede to anything thatValentine thought fit to propose, and he likewise felt thata piece of intelligence such as he just heard ought to bemore than sufficient to content him for one day. However, hewould not leave without the promise of seeing Valentineagain the next night. Valentine promised all that Morrelrequired of her, and certainly it was less difficult now forher to believe that she should marry Maximilian than it wasan hour ago to assure herself that she should not marryFranz. During the time occupied by the interview we havejust detailed, Madame de Villefort had gone to visit M.Noirtier. The old man looked at her with that stern andforbidding expression with which he was accustomed toreceive her.

　　"Sir," said she, "it is superfluous for me to tell you thatValentine's marriage is broken off, since it was here thatthe affair was concluded." Noirtier's countenance remainedimmovable. "But one thing I can tell you, of which I do notthink you are aware; that is, that I have always beenopposed to this marriage, and that the contract was enteredinto entirely without my consent or approbation." Noirtierregarded his daughter-in-law with the look of a man desiringan explanation. "Now that this marriage, which I know you somuch disliked, is done away with, I come to you on an errandwhich neither M. de Villefort nor Valentine couldconsistently undertake." Noirtier's eyes demanded the natureof her mission. "I come to entreat you, sir," continuedMadame de Villefort, "as the only one who has the right ofdoing so, inasmuch as I am the only one who will receive nopersonal benefit from the transaction, -- I come to entreatyou to restore, not your love, for that she has alwayspossessed, but to restore your fortune to yourgranddaughter."

　　There was a doubtful expression in Noirtier's eyes; he wasevidently trying to discover the motive of this proceeding,and he could not succeed in doing so. "May I hope, sir,"said Madame de Villefort, "that your intentions accord withmy request?" Noirtier made a sign that they did. "In thatcase, sir," rejoined Madame de Villefort, "I will leave youoverwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at your promptacquiescence to my wishes." She then bowed to M. Noirtierand retired.

　　The next day M. Noirtier sent for the notary; the first willwas torn up and a second made, in which he left the whole ofhis fortune to Valentine, on condition that she should neverbe separated from him. It was then generally reported thatMademoiselle de Villefort, the heiress of the marquis andmarchioness of Saint-Meran, had regained the good graces ofher grandfather, and that she would ultimately be inpossession of an income of 300,000 livres.

　　While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of themarriage-contract were being carried on at the house of M.de Villefort, Monte Cristo had paid his visit to the Countof Morcerf, who, in order to lose no time in responding toM. Danglars' wishes, and at the same time to pay all duedeference to his position in society, donned his uniform oflieutenant-general, which he ornamented with all hiscrosses, and thus attired, ordered his finest horses anddrove to the Rue de la Chausse d'Antin.

　　Danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it wasperhaps not the most favorable moment for finding him in hisbest humor. At the first sight of his old friend, Danglarsassumed his majestic air, and settled himself in hiseasy-chair. Morcerf, usually so stiff and formal, accostedthe banker in an affable and smiling manner, and, feelingsure that the overture he was about make would be wellreceived, he did not consider it necessary to adopt anymanoeuvres in order to gain his end, but went at oncestraight to the point.

　　"Well, baron," said he, "here I am at last; some time haselapsed since our plans were formed, and they are not yetexecuted." Morcerf paused at these words, quietly waitingtill the cloud should have dispersed which had gathered onthe brow of Danglars, and which he attributed to hissilence; but, on the contrary, to his great surprise, itgrew darker and darker. "To what do you allude, monsieur?"said Danglars; as if he were trying in vain to guess at thepossible meaning of the general's words.

　　"Ah," said Morcerf, "I see you are a stickler for forms, mydear sir, and you would remind me that the ceremonial ritesshould not be omitted. Ma foi, I beg your pardon, but as Ihave but one son, and it is the first time I have everthought of marrying him, I am still serving myapprenticeship, you know; come, I will reform." And Morcerfwith a forced smile arose, and, making a low bow to M.Danglars, said: "Baron, I have the honor of asking of youthe hand of Mademoiselle Eugenie Danglars for my son, theVicomte Albert de Morcerf."

　　But Danglars, instead of receiving this address in thefavorable manner which Morcerf had expected, knit his brow,and without inviting the count, who was still standing, totake a seat. he said: "Monsieur, it will be necessary toreflect before I give you an answer."

　　"To reflect?" said Morcerf, more and more astonished; "haveyou not had enough time for reflection during the eightyears which have elapsed since this marriage was firstdiscussed between us?"

　　"Count," said the banker, "things are constantly occurringin the world to induce us to lay aside our most establishedopinions, or at all events to cause us to remodel themaccording to the change of circumstances, which may haveplaced affairs in a totally different light to that in whichwe at first viewed them."

　　"I do not understand you, baron," said Morcerf.

　　"What I mean to say is this, sir, -- that during the lastfortnight unforeseen circumstances have occurred" --

　　"Excuse me," said Morcerf, "but is it a play we are acting?"

　　"A play?"

　　"Yes, for it is like one; pray let us come more to thepoint, and endeavor thoroughly to understand each other."

　　"That is quite my desire."

　　"You have seen M. de Monte Cristo have you not?"

　　"I see him very often," said Danglars, drawing himself up;"he is a particular friend of mine."

　　"Well, in one of your late conversations with him, you saidthat I appeared to be forgetful and irresolute concerningthis marriage, did you not?"

　　"I did say so."

　　"Well, here I am, proving at once that I am really neitherthe one nor the other, by entreating you to keep yourpromise on that score."

　　Danglars did not answer. "Have you so soon changed yourmind," added Morcerf, "or have you only provoked my requestthat you may have the pleasure of seeing me humbled?"Danglars, seeing that if he continued the conversation inthe same tone in which he had begun it, the whole thingmight turn out to his own disadvantage, turned to Morcerf,and said: "Count, you must doubtless be surprised at myreserve, and I assure you it costs me much to act in such amanner towards you; but, believe me when I say thatimperative necessity has imposed the painful task upon me."

　　"These are all so many empty words, my dear sir," saidMorcerf: "they might satisfy a new acquaintance, but theComte de Morcerf does not rank in that list; and when a manlike him comes to another, recalls to him his plighted word,and this man fails to redeem the pledge, he has at least aright to exact from him a good reason for so doing."Danglars was a coward, but did not wish to appear so; he waspiqued at the tone which Morcerf had just assumed. "I am notwithout a good reason for my conduct," replied the banker.

　　"What do you mean to say?"

　　"I mean to say that I have a good reason, but that it isdifficult to explain."

　　"You must be aware, at all events, that it is impossible forme to understand motives before they are explained to me;but one thing at least is clear, which is, that you declineallying yourself with my family."

　　"No, sir," said Danglars; "I merely suspend my decision,that is all."

　　"And do you really flatter yourself that I shall yield toall your caprices, and quietly and humbly await the time ofagain being received into your good graces?"

　　"Then, count, if you will not wait, we must look upon theseprojects as if they had never been entertained." The countbit his lips till the blood almost started, to prevent theebullition of anger which his proud and irritable temperscarcely allowed him to restrain; understanding, however,that in the present state of things the laugh woulddecidedly be against him, he turned from the door, towardswhich he had been directing his steps, and again confrontedthe banker. A cloud settled on his brow, evincing decidedanxiety and uneasiness, instead of the expression ofoffended pride which had lately reigned there. "My dearDanglars," said Morcerf, "we have been acquainted for manyyears, and consequently we ought to make some allowance foreach other's failings. You owe me an explanation, and reallyit is but fair that I should know what circumstance hasoccurred to deprive my son of your favor."

　　"It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount,that is all I can say, sir," replied Danglars, who resumedhis insolent manner as soon as he perceived that Morcerf wasa little softened and calmed down. "And towards whom do youbear this personal ill-feeling, then?" said Morcerf, turningpale with anger. The expression of the count's face had notremained unperceived by the banker; he fixed on him a lookof greater assurance than before, and said: "You may,perhaps, be better satisfied that I should not go fartherinto particulars."

　　A tremor of suppressed rage shook the whole frame of thecount, and making a violent effort over himself, he said: "Ihave a right to insist on your giving me an explanation. Isit Madame de Morcerf who has displeased you? Is it myfortune which you find insufficient? Is it because myopinions differ from yours?"

　　"Nothing of the kind, sir," replied Danglars: "if such hadbeen the case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch asI was aware of all these things when I made the engagement.No, do not seek any longer to discover the reason. I reallyam quite ashamed to have been the cause of your undergoingsuch severe self-examination; let us drop the subject, andadopt the middle course of delay, which implies neither arupture nor an engagement. Ma foi, there is no hurry. Mydaughter is only seventeen years old, and your sontwenty-one. While we wait, time will be progressing, eventswill succeed each other; things which in the evening lookdark and obscure, appear but too clearly in the light ofmorning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, or thelapse of a single day, will reveal the most cruelcalumnies."

　　"Calumnies, did you say, sir?" cried Morcerf, turning lividwith rage. "Does any one dare to slander me?"

　　"Monsieur, I told you that I considered it best to avoid allexplanation."

　　"Then, sir, I am patiently to submit to your refusal?"

　　"Yes, sir, although I assure you the refusal is as painfulfor me to give as it is for you to receive, for I hadreckoned on the honor of your alliance, and the breaking offof a marriage contract always injures the lady more than thegentleman."

　　"Enough, sir," said Morcerf, "we will speak no more on thesubject." And clutching his gloves in anger, he left theapartment. Danglars observed that during the wholeconversation Morcerf had never once dared to ask if it wason his own account that Danglars recalled his word. Thatevening he had a long conference with several friends; andM. Cavalcanti, who had remained in the drawing-room with theladies, was the last to leave the banker's house.

　　The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked forthe newspapers; they were brought to him; he laid asidethree or four, and at last fixed on the Impartial, the paperof which Beauchamp was the chief editor. He hastily tore offthe cover, opened the journal with nervous precipitation,passed contemptuously over the Paris jottings, and arrivingat the miscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a malicioussmile, at a paragraph headed "We hear from Yanina." "Verygood," observed Danglars, after having read the paragraph;"here is a little article on Colonel Fernand, which, if I amnot mistaken, would render the explanation which the Comtede Morcerf required of me perfectly unnecessary."

　　At the same moment, that is, at nine o'clock in the morning,Albert de Morcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up tohis chin, might have been seen walking with a quick andagitated step in the direction of Monte Cristo's house inthe Champs Elysees. When he presented himself at the gatethe porter informed him that the Count had gone out abouthalf an hour previously. "Did he take Baptistin with him?"

　　"No, my lord."

　　"Call him, then; I wish to speak to him." The concierge wentto seek the valet de chambre, and returned with him in aninstant.

　　"My good friend," said Albert, "I beg pardon for myintrusion, but I was anxious to know from your own mouth ifyour master was really out or not."

　　"He is really out, sir," replied Baptistin.

　　"Out, even to me?"

　　"I know how happy my master always is to receive thevicomte," said Baptistin; "and I should therefore neverthink of including him in any general order."

　　"You are right; and now I wish to see him on an affair ofgreat importance. Do you think it will be long before hecomes in?"

　　"No, I think not, for he ordered his breakfast at teno'clock."

　　"Well, I will go and take a turn in the Champs Elysees, andat ten o'clock I will return here; meanwhile, if the countshould come in, will you beg him not to go out again withoutseeing me?"

　　"You may depend on my doing so, sir," said Baptistin.

　　Albert left the cab in which he had come at the count'sdoor, intending to take a turn on foot. As he was passingthe Allee des Veuves, he thought he saw the count's horsesstanding at Gosset's shooting-gallery; he approached, andsoon recognized the coachman. "Is the count shooting in thegallery?" said Morcerf.

　　"Yes, sir," replied the coachman. While he was speaking,Albert had heard the report of two or three pistol-shots. Heentered, and on his way met the waiter. "Excuse me, mylord," said the lad; "but will you have the kindness to waita moment?"

　　"What for, Philip?" asked Albert, who, being a constantvisitor there, did not understand this opposition to hisentrance.

　　"Because the person who is now in the gallery prefers beingalone, and never practices in the presence of any one."

　　"Not even before you, Philip? Then who loads his pistol?"

　　"His servant."

　　"A Nubian?"

　　"A negro."

　　"It is he, then."

　　"Do you know this gentleman?"

　　"Yes, and I am come to look for him; he is a friend ofmine."

　　"Oh, that is quite another thing, then. I will goimmediately and inform him of your arrival." And Philip,urged by his own curiosity, entered the gallery; a secondafterwards, Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold. "I askyour pardon, my dear count," said Albert, "for following youhere, and I must first tell you that it was not the fault ofyour servants that I did so; I alone am to blame for theindiscretion. I went to your house, and they told me youwere out, but that they expected you home at ten o'clock tobreakfast. I was walking about in order to pass away thetime till ten o'clock, when I caught sight of your carriageand horses."

　　"What you have just said induces me to hope that you intendbreakfasting with me."

　　"No, thank you, I am thinking of other things besidesbreakfast just now; perhaps we may take that meal at a laterhour and in worse company."

　　"What on earth are you talking of?"

　　"I am to fight to-day."

　　"For what?"

　　"I am going to fight" --

　　"Yes, I understand that, but what is the quarrel? Peoplefight for all sorts of reasons, you know."-

　　"I fight in the cause of honor."

　　"Ah, that is something serious."

　　"So serious, that I come to beg you to render me a service."

　　"What is it?"

　　"To be my second."

　　"That is a serious matter, and we will not discuss it here;let us speak of nothing till we get home. Ali, bring me somewater." The count turned up his sleeves, and passed into thelittle vestibule where the gentlemen were accustomed to washtheir hands after shooting. "Come in, my lord," said Philipin a low tone, "and I will show you something droll."Morcerf entered, and in place of the usual target, he sawsome playing-cards fixed against the wall. At a distanceAlbert thought it was a complete suit, for he counted fromthe ace to the ten. "Ah, ha," said Albert, "I see you werepreparing for a game of cards."

　　"No," said the count, "I was making a suit."

　　"How?" said Albert.

　　"Those are really aces and twos which you see, but my shotshave turned them into threes, fives, sevens, eights, nines,and tens." Albert approached. In fact, the bullets hadactually pierced the cards in the exact places which thepainted signs would otherwise have occupied, the lines anddistances being as regularly kept as if they had been ruledwith pencil. "Diable," said Morcerf.

　　"What would you have, my dear viscount?" said Monte Cristo,wiping his hands on the towel which Ali had brought him; "Imust occupy my leisure moments in some way or other. Butcome, I am waiting for you." Both men entered Monte Cristo'scarriage, which in the course of a few minutes depositedthem safely at No. 30. Monte Cristo took Albert into hisstudy, and pointing to a seat, placed another for himself."Now let us talk the matter over quietly," said the count.

　　"You see I am perfectly composed," said Albert.

　　"With whom are you going to fight?"

　　"With Beauchamp."

　　"One of your friends!"

　　"Of course; it is always with friends that one fights."

　　"I suppose you have some cause of quarrel?"

　　"I have."

　　"What has he done to you?"

　　"There appeared in his journal last night -- but wait, andread for yourself." And Albert handed over the paper to thecount, who read as follows: --

　　"A correspondent at Yanina informs us of a fact of whichuntil now we had remained in ignorance. The castle whichformed the protection of the town was given up to the Turksby a French officer named Fernand, in whom the grand vizier,Ali Tepelini, had reposed the greatest confidence."

　　"Well," said Monte Cristo, "what do you see in that to annoyyou?"

　　"What do I see in it?"

　　"Yes; what does it signify to you if the castle of Yaninawas given up by a French officer?"

　　"It signifies to my father, the Count of Morcerf, whoseChristian name is Fernand!"

　　"Did your father serve under Ali Pasha?"

　　"Yes; that is to say, he fought for the independence of theGreeks, and hence arises the calumny."

　　"Oh, my dear viscount, do talk reason!"

　　"I do not desire to do otherwise."

　　"Now, just tell me who the devil should know in France thatthe officer Fernand and the Count of Morcerf are one and thesame person? and who cares now about Yanina, which was takenas long ago as the year 1822 or 1823?"

　　"That just shows the meanness of this slander. They haveallowed all this time to elapse, and then all of a suddenrake up events which have been forgotten to furnishmaterials for scandal, in order to tarnish the lustre of ourhigh position. I inherit my father's name, and I do notchoose that the shadow of disgrace should darken it. I amgoing to Beauchamp, in whose journal this paragraph appears,and I shall insist on his retracting the assertion beforetwo witnesses."

　　"Beauchamp will never retract."

　　"Then he must fight."

　　"No he will not, for he will tell you, what is very true,that perhaps there were fifty officers in the Greek armybearing the same name."

　　"We will fight, nevertheless. I will efface that blot on myfather's character. My father, who was such a brave soldier,whose career was so brilliant" --

　　"Oh, well, he will add, `We are warranted in believing thatthis Fernand is not the illustrious Count of Morcerf, whoalso bears the same Christian name.'"

　　"I am determined not to be content with anything short of anentire retractation."

　　"And you intend to make him do it in the presence of twowitnesses, do you?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You do wrong."

　　"Which means, I suppose, that you refuse the service which Iasked of you?"

　　"You know my theory regarding duels; I told you my opinionon that subject, if you remember, when we were at Rome."

　　"Nevertheless, my dear count, I found you this morningengaged in an occupation but little consistent with thenotions you profess to entertain."

　　"Because, my dear fellow, you understand one must never beeccentric. If one's lot is cast among fools, it is necessaryto study folly. I shall perhaps find myself one day calledout by some harebrained scamp, who has no more real cause ofquarrel with me than you have with Beauchamp; he may take meto task for some foolish trifle or other, he will bring hiswitnesses, or will insult me in some public place, and I amexpected to kill him for all that."

　　"You admit that you would fight, then? Well, if so, why doyou object to my doing so?"

　　"I do not say that you ought not to fight, I only say that aduel is a serious thing, and ought not to be undertakenwithout due reflection."

　　"Did he reflect before he insulted my father?"

　　"If he spoke hastily, and owns that he did so, you ought tobe satisfied."

　　"Ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent."

　　"And you are far too exacting. Supposing, for instance, anddo not be angry at what I am going to say" --

　　"Well."

　　"Supposing the assertion to be really true?"

　　"A son ought not to submit to such a stain on his father'shonor."

　　"Ma foi, we live in times when there is much to which wemust submit."

　　"That is precisely the fault of the age."

　　"And do you undertake to reform it?"

　　"Yes, as far as I am personally concerned."

　　"Well, you the indeed exacting, my dear fellow!"

　　"Yes, I own it."

　　"Are you quite impervious to good advice?"

　　"Not when it comes from a friend."

　　"And do you account me that title?"

　　"Certainly I do."

　　"Well, then, before going to Beauchamp with your witnesses,seek further information on the subject."

　　"From whom?"

　　"From Haidee."

　　"Why, what can be the use of mixing a woman up in theaffair? -- what can she do in it?"

　　"She can declare to you, for example, that your father hadno hand whatever in the defeat and death of the vizier; orif by chance he had, indeed, the misfortune to" --

　　"I have told you, my dear count, that I would not for onemoment admit of such a proposition."

　　"You reject this means of information, then?"

　　"I do -- most decidedly."

　　"Then let me offer one more word of advice."

　　"Do so, then, but let it be the last."

　　"You do not wish to hear it, perhaps?"

　　"On the contrary, I request it."

　　"Do not take any witnesses with you when you go to Beauchamp-- visit him alone."

　　"That would be contrary to all custom."

　　"Your case is not an ordinary one."

　　"And what is your reason for advising me to go alone?"

　　"Because then the affair will rest between you andBeauchamp."

　　"Explain yourself."

　　"I will do so. If Beauchamp be disposed to retract, youought at least to give him the opportunity of doing it ofhis own free will, -- the satisfaction to you will be thesame. If, on the contrary, he refuses to do so, it will thenbe quite time enough to admit two strangers into yoursecret."

　　"They will not be strangers, they will be friends."

　　"Ah, but the friends of to-day are the enemies of to-morrow;Beauchamp, for instance."

　　"So you recommend" --

　　"I recommend you to be prudent."

　　"Then you advise me to go alone to Beauchamp?"

　　"I do, and I will tell you why. When you wish to obtain someconcession from a man's self-love, you must avoid even theappearance of wishing to wound it."

　　"I believe you are right."

　　"I am glad of it."

　　"Then I will go alone."

　　"Go; but you would do better still by not going at all."

　　"That is impossible."

　　"Do so, then; it will be a wiser plan than the first whichyou proposed."

　　"But if, in spite of all my precautions, I am at lastobliged to fight, will you not be my second?"

　　"My dear viscount," said Monte Cristo gravely, "you musthave seen before to-day that at all times and in all placesI have been at your disposal, but the service which you havejust demanded of me is one which it is out of my power torender you."

　　"Why?"

　　"Perhaps you may know at some future period, and in the meantime I request you to excuse my declining to put you inpossession of my reasons."

　　"Well, I will have Franz and Chateau-Renaud; they will bethe very men for it."

　　"Do so, then."

　　"But if I do fight, you will surely not object to giving mea lesson or two in shooting and fencing?"

　　"That, too, is impossible."

　　"What a singular being you are! -- you will not interfere inanything."

　　"You are right -- that is the principle on which I wish toact."

　　"We will say no more about it, then. Good-by, count."Morcerf took his hat, and left the room. He found hiscarriage at the door, and doing his utmost to restrain hisanger he went at once to find Beauchamp, who was in hisoffice. It was a gloomy, dusty-looking apartment, such asjournalists' offices have always been from time immemorial.The servant announced M. Albert de Morcerf. Beauchamprepeated the name to himself, as though he could scarcelybelieve that he had heard aright, and then gave orders forhim to be admitted. Albert entered. Beauchamp uttered anexclamation of surprise on seeing his friend leap over andtrample under foot all the newspapers which were strewedabout the room. "This way, this way, my dear Albert!" saidhe, holding out his hand to the young man. "Are you out ofyour senses, or do you come peaceably to take breakfast withme? Try and find a seat -- there is one by that geranium,which is the only thing in the room to remind me that thereare other leaves in the world besides leaves of paper."

　　"Beauchamp," said Albert, "it is of your journal that I cometo speak."

　　"Indeed? What do you wish to say about it?"

　　"I desire that a statement contained in it should berectified."

　　"To what do you refer? But pray sit down."

　　"Thank you," said Albert, with a cold and formal bow.

　　"Will you now have the kindness to explain the nature of thestatement which has displeased you?"

　　"An announcement has been made which implicates the honor ofa member of my family."

　　"What is it?" said Beauchamp, much surprised; "surely youmust be mistaken."

　　"The story sent you from Yanina."

　　"Yanina?"

　　"Yes; really you appear to be totally ignorant of the causewhich brings me here."

　　"Such is really the case, I assure you, upon my honor!Baptiste, give me yesterday's paper," cried Beauchamp.

　　"Here, I have brought mine with me," replied Albert.

　　Beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to whichAlbert pointed in an undertone. "You see it is a seriousannoyance," said Morcerf, when Beauchamp had finished theperusal of the paragraph. "Is the officer referred to arelation of yours, then?" demanded the journalist.

　　"Yes," said Albert, blushing.

　　"Well, what do you wish me to do for you?" said Beauchampmildly.

　　"My dear Beauchamp, I wish you to contradict thisstatement." Beauchamp looked at Albert with a benevolentexpression.

　　"Come," said he, "this matter will want a good deal oftalking over; a retractation is always a serious thing, youknow. Sit down, and I will read it again." Albert resumedhis seat, and Beauchamp read, with more attention than atfirst, the lines denounced by his friend. "Well," saidAlbert in a determined tone, "you see that your paper hisinsulted a member of my family, and I insist on aretractation being made."

　　"You insist?"

　　"Yes, I insist."

　　"Permit me to remind you that you are not in the Chamber, mydear Viscount."

　　"Nor do I wish to be there," replied the young man, rising."I repeat that I am determined to have the announcement ofyesterday contradicted. You have known me long enough,"continued Albert, biting his lips convulsively, for he sawthat Beauchamp's anger was beginning to rise, -- "you havebeen my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimate with meto be aware that I am likely to maintain my resolution onthis point."

　　"If I have been your friend, Morcerf, your present manner ofspeaking would almost lead me to forget that I ever borethat title. But wait a moment, do not let us get angry, orat least not yet. You are irritated and vexed -- tell me howthis Fernand is related to you?"

　　"He is merely my father," said Albert -- "M. FernandMondego, Count of Morcerf, an old soldier who has fought intwenty battles and whose honorable scars they would denounceas badges of disgrace."

　　"Is it your father?" said Beauchamp; "that is quite anotherthing. Then can well understand your indignation, my dearAlbert. I will look at it again;" and he read the paragraphfor the third time, laying a stress on each word as heproceeded. "But the paper nowhere identifies this Fernandwith your father."

　　"No; but the connection will be seen by others, andtherefore I will have the article contradicted." At thewords "I will," Beauchamp steadily raised his eyes toAlbert's countenance, and then as gradually lowering them,he remained thoughtful for a few moments. "You will retractthis assertion, will you not, Beauchamp?" said Albert withincreased though stifled anger.

　　"Yes," replied Beauchamp.

　　"Immediately?" said Albert.

　　"When I am convinced that the statement is false."

　　"What?"

　　"The thing is worth looking into, and I will take pains toinvestigate the matter thoroughly."

　　"But what is there to investigate, sir?" said Albert,enraged beyond measure at Beauchamp's last remark. "If youdo not believe that it is my father, say so immediately; andif, on the contrary, you believe it to be him, state yourreasons for doing so." Beauchamp looked at Albert with thesmile which was so peculiar to him, and which in itsnumerous modifications served to express every variedemotion of his mind. "Sir," replied he, "if you came to mewith the idea of demanding satisfaction, you should havegone at once to the point, and not have entertained me withthe idle conversation to which I have been patientlylistening for the last half hour. Am I to put thisconstruction on your visit?"

　　"Yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamouscalumny."

　　"Wait a moment -- no threats, if you please, M. FernandMondego, Vicomte de Morcerf; I never allow them from myenemies, and therefore shall not put up with them from myfriends. You insist on my contradicting the article relatingto General Fernand, an article with which, I assure you onmy word of honor, I had nothing whatever to do?"

　　"Yes, I insist on it," said Albert, whose mind was beginningto get bewildered with the excitement of his feelings.

　　"And if I refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?"said Beauchamp in a calm tone.

　　"Yes," replied Albert, raising his voice.

　　"Well," said Beauchamp, "here is my answer, my dear sir. Thearticle was not inserted by me -- I was not even aware ofit; but you have, by the step you have taken, called myattention to the paragraph in question, and it will remainuntil it shall be either contradicted or confirmed by someone who has a right to do so."

　　"Sir," said Albert, rising, "I will do myself the honor ofsending my seconds to you, and you will be kind enough toarrange with them the place of meeting and the weapons."

　　"Certainly, my dear sir."

　　"And this evening, if you please, or to-morrow at thelatest, we will meet."

　　"No, no, I will be on the ground at the proper time; but inmy opinion (and I have a right to dictate the preliminaries,as it is I who have received the provocation) -- in myopinion the time ought not to be yet. I know you to be wellskilled in the management of the sword, while I am onlymoderately so; I know, too, that you are a good marksman --there we are about equal. I know that a duel between us twowould be a serious affair, because you are brave, and I ambrave also. I do not therefore wish either to kill you, orto be killed myself without a cause. Now, I am going to puta question to you, and one very much to the purpose too. Doyou insist on this retractation so far as to kill me if I donot make it, although I have repeated more than once, andaffirmed on my honor, that I was ignorant of the thing withwhich you charge me, and although I still declare that it isimpossible for any one but you to recognize the Count ofMorcerf under the name of Fernand?"

　　"I maintain my original resolution."

　　"Very well, my dear sir; then I consent to cut throats withyou. But I require three weeks' preparation; at the end ofthat time I shall come and say to you, `The assertion isfalse, and I retract it,' or `The assertion is true,' when Ishall immediately draw the sword from its sheath, or thepistols from the case, whichever you please."

　　"Three weeks!" cried Albert; "they will pass as slowly asthree centuries when I am all the time suffering dishonor."

　　"Had you continued to remain on amicable terms with me, Ishould have said, `Patience, my friend;' but you haveconstituted yourself my enemy, therefore I say, `What doesthat signify to me, sir?'"

　　"Well, let it be three weeks then," said Morcerf; "butremember, at the expiration of that time no delay orsubterfuge will justify you in" --

　　"M. Albert de Morcerf," said Beauchamp, rising in his turn,"I cannot throw you out of window for three weeks -- that isto say, for twenty-four days to come -- nor have you anyright to split my skull open till that time has elapsed.To-day is the 29th of August; the 21st of September will,therefore, be the conclusion of the term agreed on, and tillthat time arrives -- and it is the advice of a gentlemanwhich I am about to give you -- till then we will refrainfrom growling and barking like two dogs chained within sightof each other." When he had concluded his speech, Beauchampbowed coldly to Albert, turned his back upon him, and wentto the press-room.

　　Albert vented his anger on a pile of newspapers, which hesent flying all over the office by switching them violentlywith his stick; after which ebullition he departed -- not,however, without walking several times to the door of thepress-room, as if he had half a mind to enter. While Albertwas lashing the front of his carriage in the same mannerthat he had the newspapers which were the innocent agents ofhis discomfiture, as he was crossing the barrier heperceived Morrel, who was walking with a quick step and abright eye. He was passing the Chinese Baths, and appearedto have come from the direction of the Porte Saint-Martin,and to be going towards the Madeleine. "Ah," said Morcerf,"there goes a happy man!" And it so happened Albert was notmistaken in his opinion.

　　Chapter 79The Lemonade.

　　Morrel was, in fact, very happy. M. Noirtier had just sentfor him, and he was in such haste to know the reason of hisdoing so that he had not stopped to take a cab, placinginfinitely more dependence on his own two legs than on thefour legs of a cab-horse. He had therefore set off at afurious rate from the Rue Meslay, and was hastening withrapid strides in the direction of the Faubourg Saint-Honore.Morrel advanced with a firm, manly tread, and poor Barroisfollowed him as he best might. Morrel was only thirty-one,Barrois was sixty years of age; Morrel was deeply in love,and Barrois was dying with heat and exertion. These two men,thus opposed in age and interests, resembled two parts of atriangle, presenting the extremes of separation, yetnevertheless possessing their point of union. This point ofunion was Noirtier, and it was he who had just sent forMorrel, with the request that the latter would lose no timein coming to him -- a command which Morrel obeyed to theletter, to the great discomfiture of Barrois. On arriving atthe house, Morrel was not even out of breath, for love lendswings to our desires; but Barrois, who had long forgottenwhat it was to love, was sorely fatigued by the expeditionhe had been constrained to use.

　　The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance,closed the door of the study, and soon the rustling of adress announced the arrival of Valentine. She lookedmarvellously beautiful in her deep mourning dress, andMorrel experienced such intense delight in gazing upon herthat he felt as if he could almost have dispensed with theconversation of her grandfather. But the easy-chair of theold man was heard rolling along the floor, and he soon madehis appearance in the room. Noirtier acknowledged by a lookof extreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which Morrellavished on him for his timely intervention on behalf ofValentine and himself -- an intervention which had savedthem from despair. Morrel then cast on the invalid aninterrogative look as to the new favor which he designed tobestow on him. Valentine was sitting at a little distancefrom them, timidly awaiting the moment when she should beobliged to speak. Noirtier fixed his eyes on her. "Am I tosay what you told me?" asked Valentine. Noirtier made a signthat she was to do so.

　　"Monsieur Morrel," said Valentine to the young man, who wasregarding her with the most intense interest, "mygrandfather, M. Noirtier, had a thousand things to say,which he told me three days ago; and now, he has sent foryou, that I may repeat them to you. I will repeat them,then; and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, I willbe faithful to the trust, and will not alter a word of hisintentions."

　　"Oh, I am listening with the greatest impatience," repliedthe young man; "speak, I beg of you." Valentine cast downher eyes; this was a good omen for Morrel, for he knew thatnothing but happiness could have the power of thusovercoming Valentine. "My grandfather intends leaving thishouse," said she, "and Barrois is looking out suitableapartments for him in another."

　　"But you, Mademoiselle de Villefort, -- you, who arenecessary to M. Noirtier's happiness" --

　　"I?" interrupted Valentine; "I shall not leave mygrandfather, -- that is an understood thing between us. Myapartment will be close to his. Now, M. de Villefort musteither give his consent to this plan or his refusal; in thefirst case, I shall leave directly, and in the second, Ishall wait till I am of age, which will be in about tenmonths. Then I shall be free, I shall have an independentfortune, and" --

　　"And what?" demanded Morrel.

　　"And with my grandfather's consent I shall fulfil thepromise which I have made you." Valentine pronounced theselast few words in such a low tone, that nothing but Morrel'sintense interest in what she was saying could have enabledhim to hear them. "Have I not explained your wishes,grandpapa?" said Valentine, addressing Noirtier. "Yes,"looked the old man. -- "Once under my grandfather's roof, M.Morrel can visit me in the presence of my good and worthyprotector, if we still feel that the union we contemplatedwill be likely to insure our future comfort and happiness;in that case I shall expect M. Morrel to come and claim meat my own hands. But, alas, I have heard it said that heartsinflamed by obstacles to their desire grew cold in time ofsecurity; I trust we shall never find it so in ourexperience!"

　　"Oh," cried Morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on hisknees before Noirtier and Valentine, and to adore them astwo superior beings, "what have I ever done in my life tomerit such unbounded happiness?"

　　"Until that time," continued the young girl in a calm andself-possessed tone of voice, "we will conform tocircumstances, and be guided by the wishes of our friends,so long as those wishes do not tend finally to separate us;in a word, and I repeat it, because it expresses all I wishto convey, -- we will wait."

　　"And I swear to make all the sacrifices which this wordimposes, sir," said Morrel, "not only with resignation, butwith cheerfulness."

　　"Therefore," continued Valentine, looking playfully atMaximilian, "no more inconsiderate actions -- no more rashprojects; for you surely would not wish to compromise onewho from this day regards herself as destined, honorably andhappily, to bear your name?"

　　Morrel looked obedience to her commands. Noirtier regardedthe lovers with a look of ineffable tenderness, whileBarrois, who had remained in the room in the character of aman privileged to know everything that passed, smiled on theyouthful couple as he wiped the perspiration from his baldforehead. "How hot you look, my good Barrois," saidValentine.

　　"Ah, I have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but I mustdo M. Morrel the justice to say that he ran still faster."Noirtier directed their attention to a waiter, on which wasplaced a decanter containing lemonade and a glass. Thedecanter was nearly full, with the exception of a little,which had been already drunk by M. Noirtier.

　　"Come, Barrois," said the young girl, "take some of thislemonade; I see you are coveting a good draught of it."

　　"The fact is, mademoiselle," said Barrois, "I am dying withthirst, and since you are so kind as to offer it me, Icannot say I should at all object to drinking your health ina glass of it."

　　"Take some, then, and come back immediately." Barrois tookaway the waiter, and hardly was he outside the door, whichin his haste he forgot to shut, than they saw him throw backhis head and empty to the very dregs the glass whichValentine had filled. Valentine and Morrel were exchangingtheir adieux in the presence of Noirtier when a ring washeard at the door-bell. It was the signal of a visit.Valentine looked at her watch.

　　"It is past noon," said she, "and to-day is Saturday; I daresay it is the doctor, grandpapa." Noirtier looked hisconviction that she was right in her supposition. "He willcome in here, and M. Morrel had better go, -- do you notthink so, grandpapa?"

　　"Yes," signed the old man.

　　"Barrois," cried Valentine, "Barrois!"

　　"I am coming, mademoiselle," replied he. "Barrois will openthe door for you," said Valentine, addressing Morrel. "Andnow remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that mygrandfather commands you not to take any rash or ill-advisedstep which would be likely to compromise our happiness."

　　"I promised him to wait," replied Morrel; "and I will wait."

　　At this moment Barrois entered. "Who rang?" asked Valentine.

　　"Doctor d'Avrigny," said Barrois, staggering as if he wouldfall.

　　"What is the matter, Barrois?" said Valentine. The old mandid not answer, but looked at his master with wild staringeyes, while with his cramped hand he grasped a piece offurniture to enable him to stand upright. "He is going tofall!" cried Morrel. The rigors which had attacked Barroisgradually increased, the features of the face became quitealtered, and the convulsive movement of the muscles appearedto indicate the approach of a most serious nervous disorder.Noirtier, seeing Barrois in this pitiable condition, showedby his looks all the various emotions of sorrow and sympathywhich can animate the heart of man. Barrois made some stepstowards his master.

　　"Ah, sir," said he, "tell me what is the matter with me. Iam suffering -- I cannot see. A thousand fiery darts arepiercing my brain. Ah, don't touch me, pray don't." By thistime his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready tostart from their sockets; his head fell back, and the lowerextremities of the body began to stiffen. Valentine uttereda cry of horror; Morrel took her in his arms, as if todefend her from some unknown danger. "M. d'Avrigny, M.d'Avrigny," cried she, in a stifled voice. "Help, help!"Barrois turned round and with a great effort stumbled a fewsteps, then fell at the feet of Noirtier, and resting hishand on the knee of the invalid, exclaimed, "My master, mygood master!" At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted bythe noise, appeared on the threshold. Morrel relaxed hishold of Valentine, and retreating to a distant corner of theroom remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale as if hehad been gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye onthe agonized sufferer.

　　Noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despairat his utter inability to help his old domestic, whom heregarded more in the light of a friend than a servant. Onemight by the fearful swelling of the veins of his foreheadand the contraction of the muscles round the eye, trace theterrible conflict which was going on between the livingenergetic mind and the inanimate and helpless body. Barrois,his features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, andhis head thrown back, was lying at full length, beating thefloor with his hands, while his legs had become so stiff,that they looked as if they would break rather than bend. Aslight appearance of foam was visible around the mouth, andhe breathed painfully, and with extreme difficulty.

　　Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remainedgazing intently on the scene before him without uttering aword. He had not seen Morrel. After a moment of dumbcontemplation, during which his face became pale and hishair seemed to stand on end, he sprang towards the door,crying out, "Doctor, doctor! come instantly, pray come!"

　　"Madame, madame!" cried Valentine, calling her step-mother,and running up-stairs to meet her; "come quick, quick! --and bring your bottle of smelling-salts with you."

　　"What is the matter?" said Madame de Villefort in a harshand constrained tone.

　　"Oh, come, come!"

　　"But where is the doctor?" exclaimed Villefort; "where ishe?" Madame de Villefort now deliberately descended thestaircase. In one hand she held her handkerchief, with whichshe appeared to be wiping her face, and in the other abottle of English smelling-salts. Her first look on enteringthe room was at Noirtier, whose face, independent of theemotion which such a scene could not fail of producing,proclaimed him to be in possession of his usual health; hersecond glance was at the dying man. She turned pale, and hereye passed quickly from the servant and rested on themaster.

　　"In the name of heaven, madame," said Villefort, "where isthe doctor? He was with you just now. You see this is a fitof apoplexy, and he might be saved if he could but be bled!"

　　"Has he eaten anything lately?" asked Madame de Villefort,eluding her husband's question. "Madame," replied Valentine,"he has not even breakfasted. He has been running very faston an errand with which my grandfather charged him, and whenhe returned, took nothing but a glass of lemonade."

　　"Ah," said Madame de Villefort, "why did he not take wine?Lemonade was a very bad thing for him."

　　"Grandpapa's bottle of lemonade was standing just by hisside; poor Barrois was very thirsty, and was thankful todrink anything he could find." Madame de Villefort started.Noirtier looked at her with a glance of the most profoundscrutiny. "He has such a short neck," said she. "Madame,"said Villefort, "I ask where is M. d'Avrigny? In God's nameanswer me!"

　　"He is with Edward, who is not quite well," replied Madamede Villefort, no longer being able to avoid answering.

　　Villefort rushed up-stairs to fetch him. "Take this," saidMadame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottle toValentine. "They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I willretire, for I cannot endure the sight of blood;" and shefollowed her husband up-stairs. Morrel now emerged from hishiding-place, where he had remained quite unperceived, sogreat had been the general confusion. "Go away as quick asyou can, Maximilian," said Valentine, "and stay till I sendfor you. Go."

　　Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. Theold man, who had preserved all his usual coolness, made asign to him to do so. The young man pressed Valentine's handto his lips, and then left the house by a back staircase. Atthe same moment that he quitted the room, Villefort and thedoctor entered by an opposite door. Barrois was now showingsigns of returning consciousness. The crisis seemed past, alow moaning was heard, and he raised himself on one knee.D'Avrigny and Villefort laid him on a couch. "What do youprescribe, doctor?" demanded Villefort. "Give me some waterand ether. You have some in the house, have you not?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic."

　　Villefort immediately despatched a messenger. "And now letevery one retire."

　　"Must I go too?" asked Valentine timidly.

　　"Yes, mademoiselle, you especially," replied the doctorabruptly.

　　Valentine looked at M. d'Avrigny with astonishment, kissedher grandfather on the forehead, and left the room. Thedoctor closed the door after her with a gloomy air. "Look,look, doctor," said Villefort, "he is quite coming roundagain; I really do not think, after all, it is anything ofconsequence." M. d'Avrigny answered by a melancholy smile."How do you feel, Barrois?" asked he. "A little better,sir."

　　"Will you drink some of this ether and water?"

　　"I will try; but don't touch me."

　　"Why not?"

　　"Because I feel that if you were only to touch me with thetip of your finger the fit would return."

　　"Drink."

　　Barrois took the glass, and, raising it to his purple lips,took about half of the liquid offered him. "Where do yousuffer?" asked the doctor.

　　"Everywhere. I feel cramps over my whole body."

　　"Do you find any dazzling sensation before the eyes?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Any noise in the ears?"

　　"Frightful."

　　"When did you first feel that?"

　　"Just now."

　　"Suddenly?"

　　"Yes, like a clap of thunder."

　　"Did you feel nothing of it yesterday or the day before?"

　　"Nothing."

　　"No drowsiness?"

　　"None."

　　"What have you eaten to-day?"

　　"I have eaten nothing; I only drank a glass of my master'slemonade -- that's all;" and Barrois turned towardsNoirtier, who, immovably fixed in his arm-chair, wascontemplating this terrible scene without allowing a word ora movement to escape him.

　　"Where is this lemonade?" asked the doctor eagerly.

　　"Down-stairs in the decanter."

　　"Whereabouts downstairs?"

　　"In the kitchen."

　　"Shall I go and fetch it, doctor?" inquired Villefort.

　　"No, stay here and try to make Barrois drink the rest ofthis glass of ether and water. I will go myself and fetchthe lemonade." D'Avrigny bounded towards the door, flew downthe back staircase, and almost knocked down Madame deVillefort, in his haste, who was herself going down to thekitchen. She cried out, but d'Avrigny paid no attention toher; possessed with but one idea, he cleared the last foursteps with a bound, and rushed into the kitchen, where hesaw the decanter about three parts empty still standing onthe waiter, where it had been left. He darted upon it as aneagle would seize upon its prey. Panting with loss ofbreath, he returned to the room he had just left. Madame deVillefort was slowly ascending the steps which led to herroom. "Is this the decanter you spoke of?" asked d'Avrigny.

　　"Yes, doctor."

　　"Is this the same lemonade of which you partook?"

　　"I believe so."

　　"What did it taste like?"

　　"It had a bitter taste."

　　The doctor poured some drops of the lemonade into the palmof his hand, put his lips to it, and after having rinsed hismouth as a man does when he is tasting wine, he spat theliquor into the fireplace.

　　"It is no doubt the same," said he. "Did you drink some too,M. Noirtier?"

　　"Yes."

　　"And did you also discover a bitter taste?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Oh, doctor," cried Barrois, "the fit is coming on again.Oh, do something for me." The doctor flew to his patient."That emetic, Villefort -- see if it is coming." Villefortsprang into the passage, exclaiming, "The emetic! theemetic! -- is it come yet?" No one answered. The mostprofound terror reigned throughout the house. "If I hadanything by means of which I could inflate the lungs," saidd'Avrigny, looking around him, "perhaps I might preventsuffocation. But there is nothing which would do --nothing!" "Oh, sir," cried Barrois, "are you going to let medie without help? Oh, I am dying! Oh, save me!"

　　"A pen, a pen!" said the doctor. There was one lying on thetable; he endeavored to introduce it into the mouth of thepatient, who, in the midst of his convulsions, was makingvain attempts to vomit; but the jaws were so clinched thatthe pen could not pass them. This second attack was muchmore violent than the first, and he had slipped from thecouch to the ground, where he was writhing in agony. Thedoctor left him in this paroxysm, knowing that he could donothing to alleviate it, and, going up to Noirtier, saidabruptly, "How do you find yourself? -- well?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Have you any weight on the chest; or does your stomach feellight and comfortable -- eh?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then you feel pretty much as you generally do after youhave had the dose which I am accustomed to give you everySunday?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Did Barrois make your lemonade?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Was it you who asked him to drink some of it?"

　　"No."

　　"Was it M. de Villefort?"

　　"No."

　　"Madame?"

　　"No."

　　"It was your granddaughter, then, was it not?"

　　"Yes." A groan from Barrois, accompanied by a yawn whichseemed to crack the very jawbones, attracted the attentionof M. d'Avrigny; he left M. Noirtier, and returned to thesick man. "Barrois," said the doctor, "can you speak?"Barrois muttered a few unintelligible words. "Try and makean effort to do so, my good man." said d'Avrigny. Barroisreopened his bloodshot eyes. "Who made the lemonade?"

　　"I did."

　　"Did you bring it to your master directly it was made?"

　　"No."

　　"You left it somewhere, then, in the meantime?"

　　"Yes; I left it in the pantry, because I was called away."

　　"Who brought it into this room, then?"

　　"Mademoiselle Valentine." D'Avrigny struck his forehead withhis hand. "Gracious heaven," exclaimed he. "Doctor, doctor!"cried Barrois, who felt another fit coming.

　　"Will they never bring that emetic?" asked the doctor.

　　"Here is a glass with one already prepared," said Villefort,entering the room.

　　"Who prepared it?"

　　"The chemist who came here with me."

　　"Drink it," said the doctor to Barrois. "Impossible, doctor;it is too late; my throat is closing up. I am choking! Oh,my heart! Ah, my head! -- Oh, what agony! -- Shall I sufferlike this long?"

　　"No, no, friend," replied the doctor, "you will soon ceaseto suffer."

　　"Ah, I understand you," said the unhappy man. "My God, havemercy upon me!" and, uttering a fearful cry, Barrois fellback as if he had been struck by lightning. D'Avrigny puthis hand to his heart, and placed a glass before his lips.

　　"Well?" said Villefort. "Go to the kitchen and get me somesyrup of violets." Villefort went immediately. "Do not bealarmed, M. Noirtier," said d'Avrigny; "I am going to takemy patient into the next room to bleed him; this sort ofattack is very frightful to witness."

　　And taking Barrois under the arms, he dragged him into anadjoining room; but almost immediately he returned to fetchthe lemonade. Noirtier closed lids right eye. "You wantValentine, do you not? I will tell them to send her to you."Villefort returned, and d'Avrigny met him in the passage."Well, how is he now?" asked he. "Come in here," saidd'Avrigny, and he took him into the chamber where the sickman lay. "Is he still in a fit?" said the procureur.

　　"He is dead."

　　Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands,exclaimed, with real amazement and sympathy, "Dead? -- andso soon too!"

　　"Yes, it is very soon," said the doctor, looking at thecorpse before him; "but that ought not to astonish you;Monsieur and Madame de Saint-Meran died as soon. People dievery suddenly in your house, M. de Villefort."

　　"What?" cried the magistrate, with an accent of horror andconsternation, "are you still harping on that terribleidea?"

　　"Still, sir; and I shall always do so," replied d'Avrigny,"for it has never for one instant ceased to retainpossession of my mind; and that you may be quite sure I amnot mistaken this time, listen well to what I am going tosay, M. de Villefort." The magistrate trembled convulsively."There is a poison which destroys life almost withoutleaving any perceptible traces. I know it well; I havestudied it in all its forms and in the effects which itproduces. I recognized the presence of this poison in thecase of poor Barrois as well as in that of Madame deSaint-Meran. There is a way of detecting its presence. Itrestores the blue color of litmus-paper reddened by an acid,and it turns syrup of violets green. We have nolitmus-paper, but, see, here they come with the syrup ofviolets."

　　The doctor was right; steps were heard in the passage. M.d'Avrigny opened the door, and took from the hands of thechambermaid a cup which contained two or three spoonfuls ofthe syrup, he then carefully closed the door. "Look," saidhe to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly that itmight almost be heard, "here is in this cup some syrup ofviolets, and this decanter contains the remainder of thelemonade of which M. Noirtier and Barrois partook. If thelemonade be pure and inoffensive, the syrup will retain itscolor; if, on the contrary, the lemonade be drugged withpoison, the syrup will become green. Look closely!"

　　The doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonadefrom the decanter into the cup, and in an instant a lightcloudy sediment began to form at the bottom of the cup; thissediment first took a blue shade, then from the color ofsapphire it passed to that of opal, and from opal toemerald. Arrived at this last hue, it changed no more. Theresult of the experiment left no doubt whatever on the mind.

　　"The unfortunate Barrois has been poisoned," said d'Avrigny,"and I will maintain this assertion before God and man."Villefort said nothing, but he clasped his hands, opened hishaggard eyes, and, overcome with his emotion, sank into achair.

　　Chapter 80The Accusation.

　　M. D'Avrigny soon restored the magistrate to consciousness,who had looked like a second corpse in that chamber ofdeath. "Oh, death is in my house!" cried Villefort.

　　"Say, rather, crime!" replied the doctor.

　　"M. d'Avrigny," cried Villefort, "I cannot tell you all Ifeel at this moment, -- terror, grief, madness."

　　"Yes," said M. d'Avrigny, with an imposing calmness, "but Ithink it is now time to act. I think it is time to stop thistorrent of mortality. I can no longer bear to be inpossession of these secrets without the hope of seeing thevictims and society generally revenged." Villefort cast agloomy look around him. "In my house," murmured he, "in myhouse!"

　　"Come, magistrate," said M. d'Avrigny, "show yourself a man;as an interpreter of the law, do honor to your profession bysacrificing your selfish interests to it."

　　"You make me shudder, doctor. Do you talk of a sacrifice?"

　　"I do."

　　"Do you then suspect any one?"

　　"I suspect no one; death raps at your door -- it enters --it goes, not blindfolded, but circumspectly, from room toroom. Well, I follow its course, I track its passage; Iadopt the wisdom of the ancients, and feel my way, for myfriendship for your family and my respect for you are as atwofold bandage over my eyes; well" --

　　"Oh, speak, speak, doctor; I shall have courage."

　　"Well, sir, you have in your establishment, or in yourfamily, perhaps, one of the frightful monstrosities of whicheach century produces only one. Locusta and Agrippina,living at the same time, were an exception, and proved thedetermination of providence to effect the entire ruin of theRoman empire, sullied by so many crimes. Brunehilde andFredegonde were the results of the painful struggle ofcivilization in its infancy, when man was learning tocontrol mind, were it even by an emissary from the realms ofdarkness. All these women had been, or were, beautiful. Thesame flower of innocence had flourished, or was stillflourishing, on their brow, that is seen on the brow of theculprit in your house." Villefort shrieked, clasped hishands, and looked at the doctor with a supplicating air. Butthe latter went on without pity: --

　　"`Seek whom the crime will profit,' says an axiom ofjurisprudence."

　　"Doctor," cried Villefort, "alas, doctor, how often hasman's justice been deceived by those fatal words. I know notwhy, but I feel that this crime" --

　　"You acknowledge, then, the existence of the crime?"

　　"Yes, I see too plainly that it does exist. But it seemsthat it is intended to affect me personally. I fear anattack myself, after all these disasters."

　　"Oh, man," murmured d'Avrigny, "the most selfish of allanimals, the most personal of all creatures, who believesthe earth turns, the sun shines, and death strikes for himalone, -- an ant cursing God from the top of a blade ofgrass! And have those who have lost their lives lostnothing? -- M. de Saint-Meran, Madame de Saint-Meran, M.Noirtier" --

　　"How? M. Noirtier?"

　　"Yes; think you it was the poor servant's life was coveted?No, no; like Shakespeare's `Polonius,' he died for another.It was Noirtier the lemonade was intended for -- it isNoirtier, logically speaking, who drank it. The other drankit only by accident, and, although Barrois is dead, it wasNoirtier whose death was wished for."

　　"But why did it not kill my father?"

　　"I told you one evening in the garden after Madame deSaint-Meran's death -- because his system is accustomed tothat very poison, and the dose was trifling to him, whichwould be fatal to another; because no one knows, not eventhe assassin, that, for the last twelve months, I have givenM. Noirtier brucine for his paralytic affection, while theassassin is not ignorant, for he has proved that brucine isa violent poison."

　　"Oh, have pity -- have pity!" murmured Villefort, wringinghis hands.

　　"Follow the culprit's steps; he first kills M. deSaint-Meran" --

　　"O doctor!"

　　"I would swear to it; what I heard of his symptoms agreestoo well with what I have seen in the other cases."Villefort ceased to contend; he only groaned. "He firstkills M. de Saint-Meran," repeated the doctor, "then Madamede Saint-Meran, -- a double fortune to inherit." Villefortwiped the perspiration from his forehead. "Listenattentively."

　　"Alas," stammered Villefort, "I do not lose a single word."

　　"M. Noirtier," resumed M. d'Avrigny in the same pitilesstone, -- "M. Noirtier had once made a will against you --against your family -- in favor of the poor, in fact; M.Noirtier is spared, because nothing is expected from him.But he has no sooner destroyed his first will and made asecond, than, for fear he should make a third, he is struckdown. The will was made the day before yesterday, I believe;you see there has been no time lost."

　　"Oh, mercy, M. d'Avrigny!"

　　"No mercy, sir! The physician has a sacred mission on earth;and to fulfil it he begins at the source of life, and goesdown to the mysterious darkness of the tomb. When crime hasbeen committed, and God, doubtless in anger, turns away hisface, it is for the physician to bring the culprit tojustice."

　　"Have mercy on my child, sir," murmured Villefort.

　　"You see it is yourself who have first named her -- you, herfather."

　　"Have pity on Valentine! Listen -- it is impossible! I wouldas willingly accuse myself! Valentine, whose heart is pureas a diamond or a lily."

　　"No pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant. Mademoiselleherself packed all the medicines which were sent to M. deSaint-Meran; and M. de Saint-Meran is dead. Mademoiselle deVillefort prepared all the cooling draughts which Madame deSaint-Meran took, and Madame de Saint-Meran is dead.Mademoiselle de Villefort took from the hands of Barrois,who was sent out, the lemonade which M. Noirtier had everymorning, and he has escaped by a miracle. Mademoiselle deVillefort is the culprit -- she is the poisoner! To you, asthe king's attorney, I denounce Mademoiselle de Villefort,do your duty."

　　"Doctor, I resist no longer -- I can no longer defend myself-- I believe you; but, for pity's sake, spare my life, myhonor!"

　　"M. de Villefort," replied the doctor, with increasedvehemence, "there are occasions when I dispense with allfoolish human circumspection. If your daughter had committedonly one crime, and I saw her meditating another, I wouldsay `Warn her, punish her, let her pass the remainder of herlife in a convent, weeping and praying.' If she hadcommitted two crimes, I would say, `Here, M. de Villefort,is a poison that the prisoner is not acquainted with, -- onethat has no known antidote, quick as thought, rapid aslightning, mortal as the thunderbolt; give her that poison,recommending her soul to God, and save your honor and yourlife, for it is yours she aims at; and I can picture herapproaching your pillow with her hypocritical smiles and hersweet exhortations. Woe to you, M. de Villefort, if you donot strike first!' This is what I would say had she onlykilled two persons but she has seen three deaths, -- hascontemplated three murdered persons, -- has knelt by threecorpses! To the scaffold with the poisoner -- to thescaffold! Do you talk of your honor? Do what I tell you, andimmortality awaits you!"

　　Villefort fell on his knees. "Listen," said he; "I have notthe strength of mind you have, or rather that which youwould not have, if instead of my daughter Valentine yourdaughter Madeleine were concerned." The doctor turned pale."Doctor, every son of woman is born to suffer and to die; Iam content to suffer and to await death."

　　"Beware," said M. d'Avrigny, "it may come slowly; you willsee it approach after having struck your father, your wife,perhaps your son."

　　Villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor's arm. "Listen,"cried he; "pity me -- help me! No, my daughter is notguilty. If you drag us both before a tribunal I will stillsay, `No, my daughter is not guilty; -- there is no crime inmy house. I will not acknowledge a crime in my house; forwhen crime enters a dwelling, it is like death -- it doesnot come alone.' Listen. What does it signify to you if I ammurdered? Are you my friend? Are you a man? Have you aheart? No, you are a physician! Well, I tell you I will notdrag my daughter before a tribunal, and give her up to theexecutioner! The bare idea would kill me -- would drive melike a madman to dig my heart out with my finger-nails! Andif you were mistaken, doctor -- if it were not my daughter-- if I should come one day, pale as a spectre, and say toyou, `Assassin, you have killed my child!' -- hold -- ifthat should happen, although I am a Christian, M. d'Avrigny,I should kill myself."

　　"Well," said the doctor, after a moment's silence, "I willwait." Villefort looked at him as if he had doubted hiswords. "Only," continued M. d'Avrigny, with a slow andsolemn tone, "if any one falls ill in your house, if youfeel yourself attacked, do not send for me, for I will comeno more. I will consent to share this dreadful secret withyou, but I will not allow shame and remorse to grow andincrease in my conscience, as crime and misery will in yourhouse."

　　"Then you abandon me, doctor?"

　　"Yes, for I can follow you no farther, and I only stop atthe foot of the scaffold. Some further discovery will bemade, which will bring this dreadful tragedy to a close.Adieu."

　　"I entreat you, doctor!"

　　"All the horrors that disturb my thoughts make your houseodious and fatal. Adieu, sir."

　　"One word -- one single word more, doctor! You go, leavingme in all the horror of my situation, after increasing it bywhat you have revealed to me. But what will be reported ofthe sudden death of the poor old servant?"

　　"True," said M. d'Avrigny; "we will return." The doctor wentout first, followed by M. de Villefort. The terrifiedservants were on the stairs and in the passage where thedoctor would pass. "Sir," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, soloud that all might hear, "poor Barrois has led toosedentary a life of late; accustomed formerly to ride onhorseback, or in the carriage, to the four corners ofEurope, the monotonous walk around that arm-chair has killedhim -- his blood has thickened. He was stout, had a short,thick neck; he was attacked with apoplexy, and I was calledin too late. By the way," added he in a low tone, "take careto throw away that cup of syrup of violets in the ashes."

　　The doctor, without shaking hands with Villefort, withoutadding a word to what he had said, went out, amid the tearsand lamentations of the whole household. The same eveningall Villefort's servants, who had assembled in the kitchen,and had a long consultation, came to tell Madame deVillefort that they wished to leave. No entreaty, noproposition of increased wages, could induce them to remain;to every argument they replied, "We must go, for death is inthis house." They all left, in spite of prayers andentreaties, testifying their regret at leaving so good amaster and mistress, and especially Mademoiselle Valentine,so good, so kind, and so gentle. Villefort looked atValentine as they said this. She was in tears, and, strangeas it was, in spite of the emotions he felt at the sight ofthese tears, he looked also at Madame de Villefort, and itappeared to him as if a slight gloomy smile had passed overher thin lips, like a meteor seen passing inauspiciouslybetween two clouds in a stormy sky.

　　Chapter 81The Room of the Retired Baker.

　　The evening of the day on which the Count of Morcerf hadleft Danglars' house with feelings of shame and anger at therejection of the projected alliance, M. Andrea Cavalcanti,with curled hair, mustaches in perfect order, and whitegloves which fitted admirably, had entered the courtyard ofthe banker's house in La Chaussee d'Antin. He had not beenmore than ten minutes in the drawing-room before he drewDanglars aside into the recess of a bow-window, and, afteran ingenious preamble, related to him all his anxieties andcares since his noble father's departure. He acknowledgedthe extreme kindness which had been shown him by thebanker's family, in which he had been received as a son, andwhere, besides, his warmest affections had found an objecton which to centre in Mademoiselle Danglars. Danglarslistened with the most profound attention; he had expectedthis declaration for the last two or three days, and when atlast it came his eyes glistened as much as they had loweredon listening to Morcerf. He would not, however, yieldimmediately to the young man's request, but made a fewconscientious objections. "Are you not rather young, M.Andrea, to think of marrying?"

　　"I think not, sir," replied M. Cavalcanti; "in Italy thenobility generally marry young. Life is so uncertain, thatwe ought to secure happiness while it is within our reach."

　　"Well, sir," said Danglars, "in case your proposals, whichdo me honor, are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whomshall the preliminary arrangements be settled? So importanta negotiation should, I think, be conducted by therespective fathers of the young people."

　　"Sir, my father is a man of great foresight and prudence.Thinking that I might wish to settle in France, he left meat his departure, together with the papers establishing myidentity, a letter promising, if he approved of my choice,150,000 livres per annum from the day I was married. So faras I can judge, I suppose this to be a quarter of myfather's revenue."

　　"I," said Danglars, "have always intended giving my daughter500,000 francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my soleheiress."

　　"All would then be easily arranged if the baroness and herdaughter are willing. We should command an annuity of175,000 livres. Supposing, also, I should persuade themarquis to give me my capital, which is not likely, butstill is possible, we would place these two or threemillions in your hands, whose talent might make it realizeten per cent."

　　"I never give more than four per cent, and generally onlythree and a half; but to my son-in-law I would give five,and we would share the profit."

　　"Very good, father-in-law," said Cavalcanti, yielding to hislow-born nature, which would escape sometimes through thearistocratic gloss with which he sought to conceal it.Correcting himself immediately, he said, "Excuse me, sir;hope alone makes me almost mad, -- what will not realitydo?"

　　"But," said Danglars, -- who, on his part, did not perceivehow soon the conversation, which was at first disinterested,was turning to a business transaction, -- "there is,doubtless, a part of your fortune your father could notrefuse you?"

　　"Which?" asked the young man.

　　"That you inherit from your mother."

　　"Truly, from my mother, Leonora Corsinari."

　　"How much may it amount to?"

　　"Indeed, sir," said Andrea, "I assure you I have never giventhe subject a thought, but I suppose it must have been atleast two millions." Danglars felt as much overcome with joyas the miser who finds a lost treasure, or as theshipwrecked mariner who feels himself on solid groundinstead of in the abyss which he expected would swallow himup.

　　"Well, sir," said Andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully,"may I hope?"

　　"You may not only hope," said Danglars, "but consider it asettled thing, if no obstacle arises on your part."

　　"I am, indeed, rejoiced," said Andrea.

　　"But," said Danglars thoughtfully, "how is it that yourpatron, M. de Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal foryou?" Andrea blushed imperceptibly. "I have just left thecount, sir," said he; "he is, doubtless, a delightful manbut inconceivably peculiar in his ideas. He esteems mehighly. He even told me he had not the slightest doubt thatmy father would give me the capital instead of the interestof my property. He has promised to use his influence toobtain it for me; but he also declared that he never hadtaken on himself the responsibility of making proposals foranother, and he never would. I must, however, do him thejustice to add that he assured me if ever he had regrettedthe repugnance he felt to such a step it was on thisoccasion, because he thought the projected union would be ahappy and suitable one. Besides, if he will do nothingofficially, he will answer any questions you propose to him.And now," continued he, with one of his most charmingsmiles, "having finished talking to the father-in-law, Imust address myself to the banker."

　　"And what may you have to say to him?" said Danglars,laughing in his turn.

　　"That the day after to-morrow I shall have to draw upon youfor about four thousand francs; but the count, expecting mybachelor's revenue could not suffice for the coming month'soutlay, has offered me a draft for twenty thousand francs.It bears his signature, as you see, which isall-sufficient."

　　"Bring me a million such as that," said Danglars, "I shallbe well pleased," putting the draft in his pocket. "Fix yourown hour for to-morrow, and my cashier shall call on youwith a check for eighty thousand francs."

　　"At ten o'clock then, if you please; I should like it early,as I am going into the country to-morrow."

　　"Very well, at ten o'clock;, you are still at the Hotel desPrinces?"

　　"Yes."

　　The following morning, with the banker's usual punctuality,the eighty thousand francs were placed in the young man'shands as he was on the point of starting, after having lefttwo hundred francs for Caderousse. He went out chiefly toavoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late as possiblein the evening. But scarcely had be stepped out of hiscarriage when the porter met him with a parcel in his hand."Sir," said he, "that man has been here."

　　"What man?" said Andrea carelessly, apparently forgettinghim whom he but too well recollected.

　　"Him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity."

　　"Oh," said Andrea, "my father's old servant. Well, you gavehim the two hundred francs I had left for him?"

　　"Yes, your excellency." Andrea had expressed a wish to bethus addressed. "But," continued the porter, "he would nottake them." Andrea turned pale, but as it was dark hispallor was not perceptible. "What? he would not take them?"said he with slight emotion.

　　"No, he wished to speak to your excellency; I told him youwere gone out, and after some dispute he believed me andgave me this letter, which he had brought with him alreadysealed."

　　"Give it me," said Andrea, and he read by the light of hiscarriage-lamp, -- "You know where I live; I expect youtomorrow morning at nine o'clock."

　　Andrea examined it carefully, to ascertain if the letter hadbeen opened, or if any indiscreet eyes had seen itscontents; but it was so carefully folded, that no one couldhave read it, and the seal was perfect. "Very well," saidhe. "Poor man, he is a worthy creature." He left the porterto ponder on these words, not knowing which most to admire,the master or the servant. "Take out the horses quickly, andcome up to me," said Andrea to his groom. In two seconds theyoung man had reached his room and burnt Caderousse'sletter. The servant entered just as he had finished. "Youare about my height, Pierre," said he.

　　"I have that honor, your excellency."

　　"You had a new livery yesterday?"

　　"Yes, sir."

　　"I have an engagement with a pretty little girl for thisevening, and do not wish to be known; lend me your liverytill to-morrow. I may sleep, perhaps, at an inn." Pierreobeyed. Five minutes after, Andrea left the hotel,completely disguised, took a cabriolet, and ordered thedriver to take him to the Cheval Rouge, at Picpus. The nextmorning he left that inn as he had left the Hotel desPrinces, without being noticed, walked down the Faubourg St.Antoine, along the boulevard to Rue Menilmontant, andstopping at the door of the third house on the left lookedfor some one of whom to make inquiry in the porter'sabsence. "For whom are you looking, my fine fellow?" askedthe fruiteress on the opposite side.

　　"Monsieur Pailletin, if you please, my good woman," repliedAndrea.

　　"A retired baker?" asked the fruiteress.

　　"Exactly."

　　"He lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the thirdstory." Andrea went as she directed him, and on the thirdfloor he found a hare's paw, which, by the hasty ringing ofthe bell, it was evident he pulled with considerableill-temper. A moment after Caderousse's face appeared at thegrating in the door. "Ah, you are punctual," said he, as hedrew back the door.

　　"Confound you and your punctuality!" said Andrea, throwinghimself into a chair in a manner which implied that he wouldrather have flung it at the head of his host.

　　"Come, come, my little fellow, don't be angry. See, I havethought about you -- look at the good breakfast we are goingto have; nothing but what you are fond of." Andrea, indeed,inhaled the scent of something cooking which was notunwelcome to him, hungry as he was; it was that mixture offat and garlic peculiar to provincial kitchens of aninferior order, added to that of dried fish, and above all,the pungent smell of musk and cloves. These odors escapedfrom two deep dishes which were covered and placed on astove, and from a copper pan placed in an old iron pot. Inan adjoining room Andrea saw also a tolerably clean tableprepared for two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one withgreen, the other with yellow, a supply of brandy in adecanter, and a measure of fruit in a cabbage-leaf, cleverlyarranged on an earthenware plate.

　　"What do you think of it, my little fellow?" saidCaderousse. "Ay, that smells good! You know I used to be afamous cook; do you recollect how you used to lick yourfingers? You were among the first who tasted any of mydishes, and I think you relished them tolerably." Whilespeaking, Caderousse went on peeling a fresh supply ofonions.

　　"But," said Andrea, ill-temperedly, "by my faith, if it wasonly to breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, I wishthe devil had taken you!"

　　"My boy," said Caderousse sententiously, "one can talk whileeating. And then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleasedto see an old friend? I am weeping with joy." He was trulycrying, but it would have been difficult to say whether joyor the onions produced the greatest effect on the lachrymalglands of the old inn-keeper of the Pont-du-Gard. "Hold yourtongue, hypocrite," said Andrea; "you love me!"

　　"Yes, I do, or may the devil take me. I know it is aweakness," said Caderousse, "but it overpowers me."

　　"And yet it has not prevented your sending for me to play mesome trick."

　　"Come," said Caderousse, wiping his large knife on hisapron, "if I did not like you, do you think I should endurethe wretched life you lead me? Think for a moment. You haveyour servant's clothes on -- you therefore keep a servant; Ihave none, and am obliged to prepare my own meals. You abusemy cookery because you dine at the table d'hote of the Hoteldes Princes, or the Cafe de Paris. Well, I too could keep aservant; I too could have a tilbury; I too could dine whereI like; but why do I not? Because I would not annoy mylittle Benedetto. Come, just acknowledge that I could, eh?"This address was accompanied by a look which was by no meansdifficult to understand. "Well," said Andrea, "admittingyour love, why do you want me to breakfast with you?"

　　"That I may have the pleasure of seeing you, my littlefellow."

　　"What is the use of seeing me after we have made all ourarrangements?"

　　"Eh, dear friend," said Caderousse, "are wills ever madewithout codicils? But you first came to breakfast, did younot? Well, sit down, and let us begin with these pilchards,and this fresh butter; which I have put on some vine-leavesto please you, wicked one. Ah, yes; you look at my room, myfour straw chairs, my images, three francs each. But what doyou expect? This is not the Hotel des Princes."

　　"Come, you are growing discontented, you are no longerhappy; you, who only wish to live like a retired baker."Caderousse sighed. "Well, what have you to say? you haveseen your dream realized."

　　"I can still say it is a dream; a retired baker, my poorBenedetto, is rich -- he has an annuity."

　　"Well, you have an annuity."

　　"I have?"

　　"Yes, since I bring you your two hundred francs." Caderousseshrugged his shoulders. "It is humiliating," said he, "thusto receive money given grudgingly, ---an uncertain supplywhich may soon fail. You see I am obliged to economize, incase your prosperity should cease. Well, my friend, fortuneis inconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said. I knowyour prosperity is great, you rascal; you are to marry thedaughter of Danglars."

　　"What? of Danglars?"

　　"Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars? I might as wellsay Count Benedetto. He was an old friend of mine and if hehad not so bad a memory he ought to invite me to yourwedding, seeing he came to mine. Yes, yes, to mine; gad, hewas not so proud then, -- he was an under-clerk to the goodM. Morrel. I have dined many times with him and the Count ofMorcerf, so you see I have some high connections and were Ito cultivate them a little, we might meet in the samedrawing-rooms."

　　"Come, your jealousy represents everything to you in thewrong light."

　　"That is all very fine, Benedetto mio, but I know what I amsaying. Perhaps I may one day put on my best coat, andpresenting myself at the great gate, introduce myself.Meanwhile let us sit down and eat." Caderousse set theexample and attacked the breakfast with good appetite,praising each dish he set before his visitor. The latterseemed to have resigned himself; he drew the corks, andpartook largely of the fish with the garlic and fat. "Ah,mate," said Caderousse, "you are getting on better termswith your old landlord!"

　　"Faith, yes," replied Andrea, whose hunger prevailed overevery other feeling.

　　"So you like it, you rogue?"

　　"So much that I wonder how a man who can cook thus cancomplain of hard living."

　　"Do you see," said Caderousse, "all my happiness is marredby one thought?"

　　"What is that?"

　　"That I am dependent on another, I who have always gained myown livelihood honestly."

　　"Do not let that disturb you, I have enough for two."

　　"No, truly; you may believe me if you will; at the end ofevery month I am tormented by remorse."

　　"Good Caderousse!"

　　"So much so, that yesterday I would not take the two hundredfrancs."

　　"Yes, you wished to speak to me; but was it indeed remorse,tell me?"

　　"True remorse; and, besides, an idea had struck me." Andreashuddered; he always did so at Caderousse's ideas. "It ismiserable -- do you see? -- always to wait till the end ofthe month. -- "Oh," said Andrea philosophically, determinedto watch his companion narrowly, "does not life pass inwaiting? Do I, for instance, fare better? Well, I waitpatiently, do I not?"

　　"Yes; because instead of expecting two hundred wretchedfrancs, you expect five or six thousand, perhaps ten,perhaps even twelve, for you take care not to let any oneknow the utmost. Down there, you always had little presentsand Christmas-boxes which you tried to hide from your poorfriend Caderousse. Fortunately he is a cunning fellow, thatfriend Caderousse."

　　"There you are beginning again to ramble, to talk again andagain of the past! But what is the use of teasing me withgoing all over that again?"

　　"Ah, you are only one and twenty, and can forget the past; Iam fifty, and am obliged to recollect it. But let us returnto business."

　　"Yes."

　　"I was going to say, if I were in your place" --

　　"Well."

　　"I would realize" --

　　"How would you realize?"

　　"I would ask for six months' in advance, under pretence ofbeing able to purchase a farm, then with my six months Iwould decamp."

　　"Well, well," said Andrea, "that isn't a bad idea."

　　"My dear friend," said Caderousse, "eat of my bread, andtake my advice; you will be none the worse off, physicallyor morally."

　　"But," said Andrea, "why do you not act on the advice yougave me? Why do you not realize a six months', a year'sadvance even, and retire to Brussels? Instead of living theretired baker, you might live as a bankrupt, using hisprivileges; that would be very good."

　　"But how the devil would you have me retire on twelvehundred francs?"

　　"Ah, Caderousse," said Andrea, "how covetous you are! Twomonths ago you were dying with hunger."

　　"The appetite grows by what it feeds on," said Caderousse,grinning and showing his teeth, like a monkey laughing or atiger growling. "And," added he, biting off with his largewhite teeth an enormous mouthful of bread, "I have formed aplan." Caderousse's plans alarmed Andrea still more than hisideas; ideas were but the germ, the plan was reality. "Letme see your plan; I dare say it is a pretty one."

　　"Why not? Who formed the plan by which we left theestablishment of M ---- ! eh? was it not I? and it was nobad one I believe, since here we are!"

　　"I do not say," replied Andrea, "that you never make a goodone; but let us see your plan."

　　"Well," pursued Caderousse, "can you without expending onesou, put me in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs?No, fifteen thousand are not enough, -- I cannot againbecome an honest man with less than thirty thousand francs."

　　"No," replied Andrea, dryly, "no, I cannot."

　　"I do not think you understand me," replied Caderousse,calmly; "I said without your laying out a sou."

　　"Do you want me to commit a robbery, to spoil all my goodfortune -- and yours with mine -- and both of us to bedragged down there again?"

　　"It would make very little difference to me," saidCaderousse, "if I were retaken, I am a poor creature to livealone, and sometimes pine for my old comrades; not like you,heartless creature, who would be glad never to see themagain." Andrea did more than tremble this time, he turnedpale.

　　"Come, Caderousse, no nonsense!" said he.

　　"Don't alarm yourself, my little Benedetto, but just pointout to me some means of gaining those thirty thousand francswithout your assistance, and I will contrive it."

　　"Well, I'll see -- I'll try to contrive some way," saidAndrea.

　　"Meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to fivehundred francs, my little fellow? I have a fancy, and meanto get a housekeeper."

　　"Well, you shall have your five hundred francs," saidAndrea; "but it is very hard for me, my poor Caderousse --you take advantage" --

　　"Bah," said Caderousse, "when you have access to countlessstores." One would have said Andrea anticipated hiscompanion's words, so did his eye flash like lightning, butit was but for a moment. "True," he replied, "and myprotector is very kind."

　　"That dear protector," said Caderousse; "and how much doeshe give you monthly?"

　　"Five thousand francs."

　　"As many thousands as you give me hundreds! Truly, it isonly bastards who are thus fortunate. Five thousand francsper month! What the devil can you do with all that?"

　　"Oh, it is no trouble to spend that; and I am like you, Iwant capital."

　　"Capital? -- yes -- I understand -- every one would likecapital."

　　"Well, and I shall get it."

　　"Who will give it to you -- your prince?"

　　"Yes, my prince. But unfortunately I must wait."

　　"You must wait for what?" asked Caderousse.

　　"For his death "

　　"The death of your prince?"

　　"Yes."

　　"How so?"

　　"Because he has made his will in my favor."

　　"Indeed?"

　　"On my honor."

　　"For how much?"

　　"For five hundred thousand."

　　"Only that? It's little enough "

　　"But so it is."

　　"No it cannot be!"

　　"Are you my friend, Caderousse?"

　　"Yes, in life or death."

　　"Well, I will tell you a secret."

　　"What is it?"

　　"But remember" --

　　"Ah, pardieu, mute as a carp."

　　"Well, I think" -- Andrea stopped and looked around.

　　"You think? Do not fear; pardieu, we are alone."

　　"I think I have discovered my father."

　　"Your true father?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Not old Cavalcanti?"

　　"No, for he has gone again; the true one, as you say."

　　"And that father is" --

　　"Well, Caderousse, it is Monte Cristo."

　　"Bah!"

　　"Yes, you understand, that explains all. He cannotacknowledge me openly, it appears, but he does it through M.Cavalcanti, and gives him fifty thousand francs for it."

　　"Fifty thousand francs for being your father? I would havedone it for half that, for twenty thousand, for fifteenthousand; why did you not think of me, ungrateful man?"

　　"Did I know anything about it, when it was all done when Iwas down there?"

　　"Ah, truly? And you say that by his will" --

　　"He leaves me five hundred thousand livres."

　　"Are you sure of it?"

　　"He showed it me; but that is not all -- there is a codicil,as I said just now."

　　"Probably."

　　"And in that codicil he acknowledges me."

　　"Oh, the good father, the brave father, the very honestfather!" said Caderousse, twirling a plate in the airbetween his two hands.

　　"Now say if I conceal anything from you?"

　　"No, and your confidence makes you honorable in my opinion;and your princely father, is he rich, very rich?"

　　"Yes, he is that; he does not himself know the amount of hisfortune."

　　"Is it possible?"

　　"It is evident enough to me, who am always at his house. Theother day a banker's clerk brought him fifty thousand francsin a portfolio about the size of your plate; yesterday hisbanker brought him a hundred thousand francs in gold."Caderousse was filled with wonder; the young man's wordssounded to him like metal, and he thought he could hear therushing of cascades of louis. "And you go into that house?"cried he briskly.

　　"When I like."

　　Caderousse was thoughtful for a moment. It was easy toperceive he was revolving some unfortunate idea in his mind.Then suddenly, -- "How I should like to see all that," criedhe; "how beautiful it must be!"

　　"It is, in fact, magnificent," said Andrea.

　　"And does he not live in the Champs-Elysees?"

　　"Yes, No. 30."

　　"Ah," said Caderousse, "No. 30."

　　"Yes, a fine house standing alone, between a court-yard anda garden, -- you must know it."

　　"Possibly; but it is not the exterior I care for, it is theinterior. What beautiful furniture there must be in it!"

　　"Have you ever seen the Tuileries?"

　　"No."

　　"Well, it surpasses that."

　　"It must be worth one's while to stoop, Andrea, when thatgood M. Monte Cristo lets fall his purse."

　　"It is not worth while to wait for that," said Andrea;"money is as plentiful in that house as fruit in anorchard."

　　"But you should take me there one day with you."

　　"How can I? On what plea?"

　　"You are right; but you have made my mouth water. I mustabsolutely see it; I shall find a way."

　　"No nonsense, Caderousse!"

　　"I will offer myself as floor-polisher."

　　"The rooms are all carpeted."

　　"Well, then, I must be contented to imagine it."

　　"That is the best plan, believe me."

　　"Try, at least, to give me an idea of what it is."

　　"How can I?"

　　"Nothing is easier. Is it large?"

　　"Middling."

　　"How is it arranged?"

　　"Faith, I should require pen, ink, and paper to make aplan."

　　"They are all here," said Caderousse, briskly. He fetchedfrom an old secretary a sheet of white paper and pen andink. "Here," said Caderousse, "draw me all that on thepaper, my boy." Andrea took the pen with an imperceptiblesmile and began. "The house, as I said, is between the courtand the garden; in this way, do you see?" Andrea drew thegarden, the court and the house.

　　"High walls?"

　　"Not more than eight or ten feet."

　　"That is not prudent," said Caderousse.

　　"In the court are orange-trees in pots, turf, and clumps offlowers."

　　"And no steel-traps?"

　　"No."

　　"The stables?"

　　"Are on either side of the gate, which you see there." AndAndrea continued his plan.

　　"Let us see the ground floor," said Caderousse.

　　"On the ground-floor, dining-room, two drawing-rooms,billiard-room, staircase in the hall, and a little backstaircase."

　　"Windows?"

　　"Magnificent windows, so beautiful, so large, that I believea man of your size should pass through each frame."

　　"Why the devil have they any stairs with such windows?"

　　"Luxury has everything."

　　"But shutters?"

　　"Yes, but they are never used. That Count of Monte Cristo isan original, who loves to look at the sky even at night."

　　"And where do the servants sleep?"

　　"Oh, they have a house to themselves. Picture to yourself apretty coach-house at the right-hand side where the laddersare kept. Well, over that coach-house are the servants'rooms, with bells corresponding with the differentapartments."

　　"Ah, diable -- bells did you say?"

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"Oh. nothing! I only say they cost a load of money to hang,and what is the use of them, I should like to know?"

　　"There used to be a dog let loose in the yard at night, butit has been taken to the house at Auteuil, to that you wentto, you know."

　　"Yes."

　　"I was saying to him only yesterday, `You are imprudent,Monsieur Count; for when you go to Auteuil and take yourservants the house is left unprotected.' Well,' said he,`what next?' `Well, next, some day you will be robbed.'"

　　"What did he answer?"

　　"He quietly said, `What do I care if I am?'"

　　"Andrea, he has some secretary with a spring."

　　"How do you know?"

　　"Yes, which catches the thief in a trap and plays a tune. Iwas told there were such at the last exhibition."

　　"He has simply a mahogany secretary, in which the key isalways kept."

　　"And he is not robbed?"

　　"No; his servants are all devoted to him."

　　"There ought to be some money in that secretary?"

　　"There may be. No one knows what there is."

　　"And where is it?"

　　"On the first floor."

　　"Sketch me the plan of that floor, as you have done of theground floor, my boy."

　　"That is very simple." Andrea took the pen. "On the firststory, do you see, there is the anteroom and thedrawing-room; to the right of the drawing-room, a libraryand a study; to the left, a bedroom and a dressing-room. Thefamous secretary is in the dressing-room."

　　"Is there a window in the dressing-room?"

　　"Two, -- one here and one there." Andrea sketched twowindows in the room, which formed an angle on the plan, andappeared as a small square added to the rectangle of thebedroom. Caderousse became thoughtful. "Does he often go toAuteuil?" added he.

　　"Two or three times a week. To-morrow, for instance, he isgoing to spend the day and night there."

　　"Are you sure of it?"

　　"He has invited me to dine there."

　　"There's a life for you," said Caderousse; "a town house anda country house."

　　"That is what it is to be rich."

　　"And shall you dine there?"

　　"Probably."

　　"When you dine there, do you sleep there?"

　　"If I like; I am at home there." Caderousse looked at theyoung man, as if to get at the truth from the bottom of hisheart. But Andrea drew a cigar-case from his pocket, took ahavana, quietly lit it, and began smoking. "When do you wantyour twelve hundred francs?" said he to Caderousse.

　　"Now, if you have them." Andrea took five and twenty louisfrom his pocket.

　　"Yellow boys?" said Caderousse; "no, I thank you."

　　"Oh, you despise them."

　　"On the contrary, I esteem them, but will not have them."

　　"You can change them, idiot; gold is worth five sous."

　　"Exactly; and he who changes them will follow friendCaderousse, lay hands on him, and demand what farmers payhim their rent in gold. No nonsense, my good fellow; silversimply, round coins with the head of some monarch or otheron them. Anybody may possess a five-franc piece."

　　"But do you suppose I carry five hundred francs about withme? I should want a porter."

　　"Well, leave them with your porter; he is to be trusted. Iwill call for them."

　　"To-day?"

　　"No, to-morrow; I shall not have time to day."

　　"Well, to-morrow I will leave them when I go to Auteuil."

　　"May I depend on it?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"Because I shall secure my housekeeper on the strength ofit."

　　"Now see here, will that be all? Eh? And will you nottorment me any more?"

　　"Never." Caderousse had become so gloomy that Andrea fearedhe should be obliged to notice the change. He redoubled hisgayety and carelessness. "How sprightly you are," saidCaderousse; "One would say you were already in possession ofyour property."

　　"No, unfortunately; but when I do obtain it" --

　　"Well?"

　　"I shall remember old friends, I can tell you that."

　　"Yes, since you have such a good memory."

　　"What do you want? It looks as if you were trying to fleeceme?"

　　"I? What an idea! I, who am going to give you another pieceof good advice."

　　"What is it?"

　　"To leave behind you the diamond you have on your finger. Weshall both get into trouble. You will ruin both yourself andme by your folly."

　　"How so?" said Andrea.

　　"How? You put on a livery, you disguise yourself as aservant, and yet keep a diamond on your finger worth four orfive thousand francs."

　　"You guess well."

　　"I know something of diamonds; I have had some."

　　"You do well to boast of it," said Andrea, who, withoutbecoming angry, as Caderousse feared, at this new extortion,quietly resigned the ring. Caderousse looked so closely atit that Andrea well knew that he was examining to see if allthe edges were perfect.

　　"It is a false diamond," said Caderousse.

　　"You are joking now," replied Andrea.

　　"Do not be angry, we can try it." Caderousse went to thewindow, touched the glass with it, and found it would cut.

　　"Confiteor," said Caderousse, putting the diamond on hislittle finger; "I was mistaken; but those thieves ofjewellers imitate so well that it is no longer worth whileto rob a jeweller's shop -- it is another branch of industryparalyzed."

　　"Have you finished?" said Andrea, -- "do you want anythingmore? -- will you have my waistcoat or my hat? Make free,now you have begun."

　　"No; you are, after all, a good companion; I will not detainyou, and will try to cure myself of my ambition."

　　"But take care the same thing does not happen to you inselling the diamond you feared with the gold."

　　"I shall not sell it -- do not fear."

　　"Not at least till the day after to-morrow," thought theyoung man.

　　"Happy rogue," said Caderousse; "you are going to find yourservants, your horses, your carriage, and your betrothed!"

　　"Yes," said Andrea.

　　"Well, I hope you will make a handsome wedding-present theday you marry Mademoiselle Danglars."

　　"I have already told you it is a fancy you have taken inyour head."

　　"What fortune has she?"

　　"But I tell you" --

　　"A million?" Andrea shrugged his shoulders.

　　"Let it be a million," said Caderousse; "you can never haveso much as I wish you."

　　"Thank you," said the young man.

　　"Oh, I wish it you with all my heart!" added Caderousse withhis hoarse laugh. "Stop, let me show you the way."

　　"It is not worth while."

　　"Yes, it is."

　　"Why?"

　　"Because there is a little secret, a precaution I thought itdesirable to take, one of Huret & Fitchet's locks, revisedand improved by Gaspard Caderousse; I will manufacture you asimilar one when you are a capitalist."

　　"Thank you," said Andrea; "I will let you know a weekbeforehand." They parted. Caderousse remained on the landinguntil he had not only seen Andrea go down the three stories,but also cross the court. Then he returned hastily, shut hisdoor carefully, and began to study, like a clever architect,the plan Andrea had left him.

　　"Dear Benedetto," said he, "I think he will not be sorry toinherit his fortune, and he who hastens the day when he cantouch his five hundred thousand will not be his worstfriend."

　　Chapter 82The Burglary.

　　The day following that on which the conversation we haverelated took place, the Count of Monte Cristo set out forAuteuil, accompanied by Ali and several attendants, and alsotaking with him some horses whose qualities he was desirousof ascertaining. He was induced to undertake this journey,of which the day before he had not even thought and whichhad not occurred to Andrea either, by the arrival ofBertuccio from Normandy with intelligence respecting thehouse and sloop. The house was ready, and the sloop whichhad arrived a week before lay at anchor in a small creekwith her crew of six men, who had observed all the requisiteformalities and were ready again to put to sea.

　　The count praised Bertuccio's zeal, and ordered him toprepare for a speedy departure, as his stay in France wouldnot be prolonged more than a mouth. "Now," said he, "I mayrequire to go in one night from Paris to Treport; let eightfresh horses be in readiness on the road, which will enableme to go fifty leagues in ten hours."

　　"Your highness had already expressed that wish," saidBertuccio, "and the horses are ready. I have bought them,and stationed them myself at the most desirable posts, thatis, in villages, where no one generally stops."

　　"That's well," said Monte Cristo; "I remain here a day ortwo -- arrange accordingly." As Bertuccio was leaving theroom to give the requisite orders, Baptistin opened thedoor: he held a letter on a silver waiter.

　　"What are you doing here?" asked the count, seeing himcovered with dust; "I did not send for you, I think?"

　　Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, andpresented the letter. "Important and urgent," said he. Thecount opened the letter, and read: --

　　"M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man willenter his house in the Champs-Elysees with the intention ofcarrying off some papers supposed to be in the secretary inthe dressing-room. The count's well-known courage willrender unnecessary the aid of the police, whose interferencemight seriously affect him who sends this advice. The count,by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing himself inthe dressing-room, would be able to defend his propertyhimself. Many attendents or apparent precautions wouldprevent the villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristowould lose the opportunity of discovering an enemy whomchance has revealed to him who now sends this warning to thecount, -- a warning he might not be able to send anothertime, if this first attempt should fail and another bemade."

　　The count's first idea was that this was an artifice -- agross deception, to draw his attention from a minor dangerin order to expose him to a greater. He was on the point ofsending the letter to the commissary of police,notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, orperhaps because of that advice, when suddenly the ideaoccurred to him that it might be some personal enemy, whomhe alone should recognize and over whom, if such were thecase, he alone would gain any advantage, as Fiesco* had doneover the Moor who would have killed him. We know the Count'svigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible,with that energy which marks the great man. From his pastlife, from his resolution to shrink from nothing, the counthad acquired an inconceivable relish for the contests inwhich he had engaged, sometimes against nature, that is tosay, against God, and sometimes against the world, that is,against the devil.

　　* The Genoese conspirator.

　　"They do not want my papers," said Monte Cristo, "they wantto kill me; they are no robbers, but assassins. I will notallow the prefect of police to interfere with my privateaffairs. I am rich enough, forsooth, to distribute hisauthority on this occasion." The count recalled Baptistin,who had left the room after delivering the letter. "Returnto Paris," said he; "assemble the servants who remain there.I want all my household at Auteuil."

　　"But will no one remain in the house, my lord?" askedBaptistin.

　　"Yes, the porter."

　　"My lord will remember that the lodge is at a distance fromthe house."

　　"Well?"

　　"The house might be stripped without his hearing the leastnoise."

　　"By whom?"

　　"By thieves."

　　"You are a fool, M. Baptistin. Thieves might strip the house-- it would annoy me less than to be disobeyed." Baptistinbowed.

　　"You understand me?" said the count. "Bring your comradeshere, one and all; but let everything remain as usual, onlyclose the shutters of the ground floor."

　　"And those of the second floor?"

　　"You know they are never closed. Go!"

　　The count signified his intention of dining alone, and thatno one but Ali should attend him. Having dined with hisusual tranquillity and moderation, the count, making asignal to Ali to follow him, went out by the side-gate andon reaching the Bois de Boulogne turned, apparently withoutdesign towards Paris and at twilight; found himself oppositehis house in the Champs-Elysees. All was dark; one solitary,feeble light was burning in the porter's lodge, about fortypaces distant from the house, as Baptistin had said. MonteCristo leaned against a tree, and with that scrutinizingglance which was so rarely deceived, looked up and down theavenue, examined the passers-by, and carefully looked downthe neighboring streets, to see that no one was concealed.Ten minutes passed thus, and he was convinced that no onewas watching him. He hastened to the side-door with Ali,entered hurriedly, and by the servants' staircase, of whichhe had the key, gained his bedroom without opening ordisarranging a single curtain, without even the porterhaving the slightest suspicion that the house, which hesupposed empty, contained its chief occupant.

　　Arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to Ali to stop;then he passed into the dressing-room, which he examined.Everything appeared as usual -- the precious secretary inits place, and the key in the secretary. He double lockedit, took the key, returned to the bedroom door, removed thedouble staple of the bolt, and went in. Meanwhile Ali hadprocured the arms the count required -- namely, a shortcarbine and a pair of double-barrelled pistols, with whichas sure an aim might be taken as with a single-barrelledone. Thus armed, the count held the lives of five men in hishands. It was about half-past nine. The count and Ali ate inhaste a crust of bread and drank a glass of Spanish wine;then Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable panels,which enabled him to see into the adjoining room. He hadwithin his reach his pistols and carbine, and Ali, standingnear him, held one of the small Arabian hatchets, whose formhas not varied since the Crusades. Through one of thewindows of the bedroom, on a line with that in thedressing-room, the count could see into the street.

　　Two hours passed thus. It was intensely dark; still Ali,thanks to his wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtlessto his long confinement, could distinguish in the darknessthe slightest movement of the trees. The little light in thelodge had long been extinct. It might be expected that theattack, if indeed an attack was projected, would be madefrom the staircase of the ground floor, and not from awindow; in Monte Cristo's opinion, the villains sought hislife, not his money. It would be his bedroom they wouldattack, and they must reach it by the back staircase, or bythe window in the dressing-room. The clock of the Invalidesstruck a quarter to twelve; the west wind bore on itsmoistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes.

　　As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard aslight noise in the dressing-room; this first sound, orrather this first grinding, was followed by a second, then athird; at the fourth, the count knew what to expect. A firmand well-practised hand was engaged in cutting the foursides of a pane of glass with a diamond. The count felt hisheart beat more rapidly. Inured as men may be to danger,forewarned as they may be of peril, they understand, by thefluttering of the heart and the shuddering of the frame, theenormous difference between a dream and a reality, betweenthe project and the execution. However, Monte Cristo onlymade a sign to apprise Ali, who, understanding that dangerwas approaching from the other side, drew nearer to hismaster. Monte Cristo was eager to ascertain the strength andnumber of his enemies.

　　The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite theopening by which the count could see into the dressing-room.He fixed his eyes on that window -- he distinguished ashadow in the darkness; then one of the panes became quiteopaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck on the outside,then the square cracked without falling. Through the openingan arm was passed to find the fastening, then a second; thewindow turned on its hinges, and a man entered. He wasalone.

　　"That's a daring rascal," whispered the count.

　　At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder. Heturned; Ali pointed to the window of the room in which theywere, facing the street. "I see!" said he, "there are two ofthem; one does the work while the other stands guard." Hemade a sign to Ali not to lose sight of the man in thestreet, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.

　　The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, hisarms stretched out before him. At last he appeared to havemade himself familiar with his surroundings. There were twodoors; he bolted them both.

　　When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expectedthat he was coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but hesimply heard the sound of the bolts sliding in their copperrings. It was only a precaution. The nocturnal visitor,ignorant of the fact that the count had removed the staples,might now think himself at home, and pursue his purpose withfull security. Alone and free to act as he wished, the manthen drew from his pocket something which the count couldnot discern, placed it on a stand, then went straight to thesecretary, felt the lock, and contrary to his expectationfound that the key was missing. But the glass-cutter was aprudent man who had provided for all emergencies. The countsoon heard the rattling of a bunch of skeleton keys, such asthe locksmith brings when called to force a lock, and whichthieves call nightingales, doubtless from the music of theirnightly song when they grind against the bolt. "Ah, ha,"whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment, "heis only a thief."

　　But the man in the dark could not find the right key. Hereached the instrument he had placed on the stand, touched aspring, and immediately a pale light, just bright enough torender objects distinct, was reflected on his hands andcountenance. "By heavens," exclaimed Monte Cristo, startingback, "it is" --

　　Ali raised his hatchet. "Don't stir," whispered MonteCristo, "and put down your hatchet; we shall require noarms." Then he added some words in a low tone, for theexclamation which surprise had drawn from the count, faintas it had been, had startled the man who remained in thepose of the old knife-grinder. It was an order the count hadjust given, for immediately Ali went noiselessly, andreturned, bearing a black dress and a three-cornered hat.Meanwhile Monte Cristo had rapidly taken off his great-coat,waistcoat, and shirt, and one might distinguish by theglimmering through the open panel that he wore a plianttunic of steel mail, of which the last in France, wheredaggers are no longer dreaded, was worn by King Louis XVI.,who feared the dagger at his breast, and whose head wascleft with a hatchet. The tunic soon disappeared under along cassock, as did his hair under a priest's wig; thethree-cornered hat over this effectually transformed thecount into an abbe.

　　The man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while MonteCristo was completing his disguise had advanced straight tothe secretary, whose lock was beginning to crack under hisnightingale.

　　"Try again," whispered the count, who depended on the secretspring, which was unknown to the picklock, clever as hemight be -- "try again, you have a few minutes' work there."And he advanced to the window. The man whom he had seenseated on a fence had got down, and was still pacing thestreet; but, strange as it appeared, he cared not for thosewho might pass from the avenue of the Champs-Elysees or bythe Faubourg St. Honore; his attention was engrossed withwhat was passing at the count's, and his only aim appearedto be to discern every movement in the dressing-room.

　　Monte Cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead anda smile passed over his lips; then drawing near to Ali, hewhispered, --

　　"Remain here, concealed in the dark, and whatever noise youhear, whatever passes, only come in or show yourself if Icall you." Ali bowed in token of strict obedience. MonteCristo then drew a lighted taper from a closet, and when thethief was deeply engaged with his lock, silently opened thedoor, taking care that the light should shine directly onhis face. The door opened so quietly that the thief heard nosound; but, to his astonishment, the room was suddenlyilluminated. He turned.

　　"Ah, good-evening, my dear M. Caderousse," said MonteCristo; "what are you doing here, at such an hour?"

　　"The Abbe Busoni!" exclaimed Caderousse; and, not knowinghow this strange apparition could have entered when he hadbolted the doors, he let fall his bunch of keys, andremained motionless and stupefied. The count placed himselfbetween Caderousse and the window, thus cutting off from thethief his only chance of retreat. "The Abbe Busoni!"repeated Caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze on the count.

　　"Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbe Busoni himself," replied MonteCristo. "And I am very glad you recognize me, dear M.Caderousse; it proves you have a good memory, for it must beabout ten years since we last met." This calmness of Busoni,combined with his irony and boldness, staggered Caderousse.

　　"The abbe, the abbe!" murmured he, clinching his fists, andhis teeth chattering.

　　"So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?" continued thefalse abbe.

　　"Reverend sir," murmured Caderousse, seeking to regain thewindow, which the count pitilessly blocked -- "reverend sir,I don't know -- believe me -- I take my oath" --

　　"A pane of glass out," continued the count, "a dark lantern,a bunch of false keys, a secretary half forced -- it istolerably evident" --

　　Caderousse was choking; he looked around for some corner tohide in, some way of escape.

　　"Come, come," continued the count, "I see you are still thesame, -- an assassin."

　　"Reverend sir, since you know everything, you know it wasnot I -- it was La Carconte; that was proved at the trial,since I was only condemned to the galleys."

　　"Is your time, then, expired, since I find you in a fair wayto return there?"

　　"No, reverend sir; I have been liberated by some one."

　　"That some one has done society a great kindness."

　　"Ah," said Caderousse, "I had promised" --

　　"And you are breaking your promise!" interrupted MonteCristo.

　　"Alas, yes!" said Caderousse very uneasily.

　　"A bad relapse, that will lead you, if I mistake not, to thePlace de Greve. So much the worse, so much the worse --diavolo, as they say in my country."

　　"Reverend sir, I am impelled" --

　　"Every criminal says the same thing."

　　"Poverty" --

　　"Pshaw!" said Busoni disdainfully; "poverty may make a manbeg, steal a loaf of bread at a baker's door, but not causehim to open a secretary in a house supposed to be inhabited.And when the jeweller Johannes had just paid you 40,000francs for the diamond I had given you, and you killed himto get the diamond and the money both, was that alsopoverty?"

　　"Pardon, reverend sir," said Caderousse; "you have saved mylife once, save me again!"

　　"That is but poor encouragement."

　　"Are you alone, reverend sir, or have you there soldiersready to seize me?"

　　"I am alone," said the abbe, "and I will again have pity onyou, and will let you escape, at the risk of the freshmiseries my weakness may lead to, if you tell me the truth."

　　"Ah, reverend sir," cried Caderousse, clasping his hands,and drawing nearer to Monte Cristo, "I may indeed say youare my deliverer!"

　　"You mean to say you have been freed from confinement?"

　　"Yes, that is true, reverend sir."

　　"Who was your liberator?"

　　"An Englishman."

　　"What was his name?"

　　"Lord Wilmore."

　　"I know him; I shall know if you lie."

　　"Ah, reverend sir, I tell you the simple truth."

　　"Was this Englishman protecting you?"

　　"No, not me, but a young Corsican, my companion."

　　"What was this young Corsican's name?"

　　"Benedetto."

　　"Is that his Christian name?"

　　"He had no other; he was a foundling."

　　"Then this young man escaped with you?"

　　"He did."

　　"In what way?"

　　"We were working at St. Mandrier, near Toulon. Do you knowSt. Mandrier?"

　　"I do."

　　"In the hour of rest, between noon and one o'clock" --

　　"Galley-slaves having a nap after dinner! We may well pitythe poor fellows!" said the abbe.

　　"Nay," said Caderousse, "one can't always work -- one is nota dog."

　　"So much the better for the dogs," said Monte Cristo.

　　"While the rest slept, then, we went away a short distance;we severed our fetters with a file the Englishman had givenus, and swam away."

　　"And what is become of this Benedetto?"

　　"I don't know."

　　"You ought to know."

　　"No, in truth; we parted at Hyeres." And, to give moreweight to his protestation, Caderousse advanced another steptowards the abbe, who remained motionless in his place, ascalm as ever, and pursuing his interrogation. "You lie,"said the Abbe Busoni, with a tone of irresistible authority.

　　"Reverend sir!"

　　"You lie! This man is still your friend, and you, perhaps,make use of him as your accomplice."

　　"Oh, reverend sir!"

　　"Since you left Toulon what have you lived on? Answer me!"

　　"On what I could get."

　　"You lie," repeated the abbe a third time, with a still moreimperative tone. Caderousse, terrified, looked at the count."You have lived on the money he has given you."

　　"True," said Caderousse; "Benedetto has become the son of agreat lord."

　　"How can he be the son of a great lord?"

　　"A natural son."

　　"And what is that great lord's name?"

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo, the very same in whose house weare."

　　"Benedetto the count's son?" replied Monte Cristo,astonished in his turn.

　　"Well, I should think so, since the count has found him afalse father -- since the count gives him four thousandfrancs a month, and leaves him 500,000 francs in his will."

　　"Ah, yes," said the factitious abbe, who began tounderstand; "and what name does the young man bearmeanwhile?"

　　"Andrea Cavalcanti."

　　"Is it, then, that young man whom my friend the Count ofMonte Cristo has received into his house, and who is goingto marry Mademoiselle Danglars?"

　　"Exactly."

　　"And you suffer that, you wretch -- you, who know his lifeand his crime?"

　　"Why should I stand in a comrade's way?" said Caderousse.

　　"You are right; it is not you who should apprise M.Danglars, it is I."

　　"Do not do so, reverend sir."

　　"Why not?"

　　"Because you would bring us to ruin."

　　"And you think that to save such villains as you I willbecome an abettor of their plot, an accomplice in theircrimes?"

　　"Reverend sir," said Caderousse, drawing still nearer.

　　"I will expose all."

　　"To whom?"

　　"To M. Danglars."

　　"By heaven!" cried Caderousse, drawing from his waistcoat anopen knife, and striking the count in the breast, "you shalldisclose nothing, reverend sir!" To Caderousse's greatastonishment, the knife, instead of piercing the count'sbreast, flew back blunted. At the same moment the countseized with his left hand the assassin's wrist, and wrung itwith such strength that the knife fell from his stiffenedfingers, and Caderousse uttered a cry of pain. But thecount, disregarding his cry, continued to wring the bandit'swrist, until, his arm being dislocated, he fell first on hisknees, then flat on the floor. The count then placed hisfoot on his head, saying, "I know not what restrains me fromcrushing thy skull, rascal."

　　"Ah, mercy -- mercy!" cried Caderousse. The count withdrewhis foot. "Rise!" said he. Caderousse rose.

　　"What a wrist you have, reverend sir!" said Caderousse.stroking his arm, all bruised by the fleshy pincers whichhad held it; "what a wrist!"

　　"Silence! God gives me strength to overcome a wild beastlike you; in the name of that God I act, -- remember that,wretch, -- and to spare thee at this moment is still servinghim."

　　"Oh!" said Caderousse, groaning with pain.

　　"Take this pen and paper, and write what I dictate."

　　"I don't know how to write, reverend sir."

　　"You lie! Take this pen, and write!" Caderousse, awed by thesuperior power of the abbe, sat down and wrote: --

　　Sir, -- The man whom you are receiving at your house, and towhom you intend to marry your daughter, is a felon whoescaped with me from confinement at Toulon. He was No. 59,and I No. 58. He was called Benedetto, but he is ignorant ofhis real name, having never known his parents.

　　"Sign it!" continued the count.

　　"But would you ruin me?"

　　"If I sought your ruin, fool, I should drag you to the firstguard-house; besides, when that note is delivered, in allprobability you will have no more to fear. Sign it, then!"

　　Caderousse signed it. "The address, `To monsieur the BaronDanglars, banker, Rue de la Chaussee d'Antin.'" Caderoussewrote the address. The abbe took the note. "Now," said he,"that suffices -- begone!"

　　"Which way?"

　　"The way you came."

　　"You wish me to get out at that window?"

　　"You got in very well."

　　"Oh, you have some design against me, reverend sir."

　　"Idiot! what design can I have?"

　　"Why, then, not let me out by the door?"

　　"What would be the advantage of waking the porter?" --

　　"Ah, reverend sir, tell me, do you wish me dead?"

　　"I wish what God wills."

　　"But swear that you will not strike me as I go down."

　　"Cowardly fool!"

　　"What do you intend doing with me?"

　　"I ask you what can I do? I have tried to make you a happyman, and you have turned out a murderer."

　　"Oh, monsieur," said Caderousse, "make one more attempt --try me once more!"

　　"I will," said the count. "Listen -- you know if I may berelied on."

　　"Yes," said Caderousse.

　　"If you arrive safely at home" --

　　"What have I to fear, except from you?"

　　"If you reach your home safely, leave Paris, leave France,and wherever you may be, so long as you conduct yourselfwell, I will send you a small annuity; for, if you returnhome safely, then" --

　　"Then?" asked Caderousse, shuddering.

　　"Then I shall believe God has forgiven you, and I willforgive you too."

　　"As true as I am a Christian," stammered Caderousse, "youwill make me die of fright!"

　　"Now begone," said the count, pointing to the window.

　　Caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put hislegs out of the window and stood on the ladder. "Now godown," said the abbe, folding his arms. Understanding he hadnothing more to fear from him, Caderousse began to go down.Then the count brought the taper to the window, that itmight be seen in the Champs-Elysees that a man was gettingout of the window while another held a light.

　　"What are you doing, reverend sir? Suppose a watchman shouldpass?" And he blew out the light. He then descended, but itwas only when he felt his foot touch the ground that he wassatisfied of his safety.

　　Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidlyfrom the garden to the street, he saw first Caderousse, whoafter walking to the end of the garden, fixed his ladderagainst the wall at a different part from where he came in.The count then looking over into the street, saw the man whoappeared to be waiting run in the same direction, and placehimself against the angle of the wall where Caderousse wouldcome over. Caderousse climbed the ladder slowly, and lookedover the coping to see if the street was quiet. No one couldbe seen or heard. The clock of the Invalides struck one.Then Caderousse sat astride the coping, and drawing up hisladder passed it over the wall; then he began to descend, orrather to slide down by the two stanchions, which he didwith an ease which proved how accustomed he was to theexercise. But, once started, he could not stop. In vain didhe see a man start from the shadow when he was halfway down-- in vain did he see an arm raised as he touched theground. Before he could defend himself that arm struck himso violently in the back that he let go the ladder, crying,"Help!" A second blow struck him almost immediately in theside, and he fell, calling, "Help, murder!" Then, as herolled on the ground, his adversary seized him by the hair,and struck him a third blow in the chest. This timeCaderousse endeavored to call again, but he could only uttera groan, and he shuddered as the blood flowed from his threewounds. The assassin, finding that he no longer cried out,lifted his head up by the hair; his eyes were closed, andthe mouth was distorted. The murderer, supposing him dead,let fall his head and disappeared. Then Caderousse, feelingthat he was leaving him, raised himself on his elbow, andwith a dying voice cried with great effort, "Murder! I amdying! Help, reverend sir, -- help!"

　　This mournful appeal pierced the darkness. The door of theback-staircase opened, then the side-gate of the garden, andAli and his master were on the spot with lights.

　　Chapter 83The Hand of God.

　　Caderousse continued to call piteously, "Help, reverend sir,help!"

　　"What is the matter?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"Help," cried Caderousse; "I am murdered!"

　　"We are here; -- take courage."

　　"Ah, it's all over! You are come too late -- you are come tosee me die. What blows, what blood!" He fainted. Ali and hismaster conveyed the wounded man into a room. Monte Cristomotioned to Ali to undress him, and he then examined hisdreadful wounds. "My God!" he exclaimed, "thy vengeance issometimes delayed, but only that it may fall the moreeffectually." Ali looked at his master for furtherinstructions. "Bring here immediately the king's attorney,M. de Villefort, who lives in the Faubourg St. Honore. Asyou pass the lodge, wake the porter, and send him for asurgeon." Ali obeyed, leaving the abbe alone withCaderousse, who had not yet revived.

　　When the wretched man again opened his eyes, the countlooked at him with a mournful expression of pity, and hislips moved as if in prayer. "A surgeon, reverend sir -- asurgeon!" said Caderousse.

　　"I have sent for one," replied the abbe.

　　"I know he cannot save my life, but he may strengthen me togive my evidence."

　　"Against whom?"

　　"Against my murderer."

　　"Did you recognize him?"

　　"Yes; it was Benedetto."

　　"The young Corsican?"

　　"Himself."

　　"Your comrade?"

　　"Yes. After giving me the plan of this house, doubtlesshoping I should kill the count and he thus become his heir,or that the count would kill me and I should be out of hisway, he waylaid me, and has murdered me."

　　"I have also sent for the procureur."

　　"He will not come in time; I feel my life fast ebbing."

　　"Wait a moment," said Monte Cristo. He left the room, andreturned in five minutes with a phial. The dying man's eyeswere all the time riveted on the door, through which hehoped succor would arrive. "Hasten, reverend sir, hasten! Ishall faint again!" Monte Cristo approached, and dropped onhis purple lips three or four drops of the contents of thephial. Caderousse drew a deep breath. "Oh," said he, "thatis life to me; more, more!"

　　"Two drops more would kill you," replied the abbe.

　　"Oh, send for some one to whom I can denounce the wretch!"

　　"Shall I write your deposition? You can sign it."

　　"Yes yes," said Caderousse; and his eyes glistened at thethought of this posthumous revenge. Monte Cristo wrote: --

　　"I die, murdered by the Corsican Benedetto, my comrade inthe galleys at Toulouse, No. 59."

　　"Quick, quick!" said Caderousse, "or I shall be unable tosign it."

　　Monte Cristo gave the pen to Caderousse, who collected allhis strength, signed it, and fell back on his bed, saying:"You will relate all the rest, reverend sir; you will say hecalls himself Andrea Cavalcanti. He lodges at the Hotel desPrinces. Oh, I am dying!" He again fainted. The abbe madehim smell the contents of the phial, and he again opened hiseyes. His desire for revenge had not forsaken him.

　　"Ah, you will tell all I have said, will you not, reverendsir?"

　　"Yes, and much more."

　　"What more will you say?"

　　"I will say he had doubtless given you the plan of thishouse, in the hope the count would kill you. I will say,likewise, he had apprised the count, by a note, of yourintention, and, the count being absent, I read the note andsat up to await you."

　　"And he will be guillotined, will be not?" said Caderousse."Promise me that, and I will die with that hope."

　　"I will say," continued the count, "that he followed andwatched you the whole time, and when he saw you leave thehouse, ran to the angle of the wall to conceal himself."

　　"Did you see all that?"

　　"Remember my words: `If you return home safely, I shallbelieve God has forgiven you, and I will forgive you also.'"

　　"And you did not warn me!" cried Caderousse, raising himselfon his elbows. "You knew I should be killed on leaving thishouse, and did not warn me!"

　　"No; for I saw God's justice placed in the hands ofBenedetto, and should have thought it sacrilege to opposethe designs of providence."

　　"God's justice! Speak not of it, reverend sir. If God werejust, you know how many would be punished who now escape."

　　"Patience," said the abbe, in a tone which made the dyingman shudder; "have patience!" Caderousse looked at him withamazement. "Besides," said the abbe, "God is merciful toall, as he has been to you; he is first a father, then ajudge."

　　"Do you then believe in God?" said Caderousse.

　　"Had I been so unhappy as not to believe in him until now,"said Monte Cristo, "I must believe on seeing you."Caderousse raised his clinched hands towards heaven.

　　"Listen," said the abbe, extending his hand over the woundedman, as if to command him to believe; "this is what the Godin whom, on your death-bed, you refuse to believe, has donefor you -- he gave you health, strength, regular employment,even friends -- a life, in fact, which a man might enjoywith a calm conscience. Instead of improving these gifts,rarely granted so abundantly, this has been your course --you have given yourself up to sloth and drunkenness, and ina fit of intoxication have ruined your best friend."

　　"Help!" cried Caderousse; "I require a surgeon, not apriest; perhaps I am not mortally wounded -- I may not die;perhaps they can yet save my life."

　　"Your wounds are so far mortal that, without the three dropsI gave you, you would now be dead. Listen, then."

　　"Ah," murmured Caderousse, "what a strange priest you are;you drive the dying to despair, instead of consoling them."

　　"Listen," continued the abbe. "When you had betrayed yourfriend God began not to strike, but to warn you. Povertyovertook you. You had already passed half your life incoveting that which you might have honorably acquired; andalready you contemplated crime under the excuse of want,when God worked a miracle in your behalf, sending you, by myhands, a fortune -- brilliant, indeed, for you, who hadnever possessed any. But this unexpected, unhoped-for,unheard-of fortune sufficed you no longer when you oncepossessed it; you wished to double it, and how? -- by amurder! You succeeded, and then God snatched it from you,and brought you to justice."

　　"It was not I who wished to kill the Jew," said Caderousse;"it was La Carconte."

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "and God, -- I cannot say injustice, for his justice would have slain you, -- but God,in his mercy, spared your life."

　　"Pardieu, to transport me for life, how merciful!"

　　"You thought it a mercy then, miserable wretch! The cowardwho feared death rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for likeall galley-slaves, you said, `I may escape from prison, Icannot from the grave.' And you said truly; the way wasopened for you unexpectedly. An Englishman visited Toulon,who had vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choicefell on you and your companion. You received a secondfortune, money and tranquillity were restored to you, andyou, who had been condemned to a felon's life, might live asother men. Then, wretched creature, then you tempted God athird time. `I have not enough,' you said, when you had morethan you before possessed, and you committed a third crime,without reason, without excuse. God is wearied; he haspunished you." Caderousse was fast sinking. "Give me drink,"said he: "I thirst -- I burn!" Monte Cristo gave him a glassof water. "And yet that villain, Benedetto, will escape!"

　　"No one, I tell you, will escape; Benedetto will bepunished."

　　"Then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do yourduty as a priest -- you should have prevented Benedetto fromkilling me."

　　"I?" said the count, with a smile which petrified the dyingman, "when you had just broken your knife against the coatof mail which protected my breast! Yet perhaps if I hadfound you humble and penitent, I might have preventedBenedetto from killing you; but I found you proud andblood-thirsty, and I left you in the hands of God."

　　"I do not believe there is a God," howled Caderousse; "youdo not believe it; you lie -- you lie!"

　　"Silence," said the abbe; "you will force the last drop ofblood from your veins. What! you do not believe in God whenhe is striking you dead? you will not believe in him, whorequires but a prayer, a word, a tear, and he will forgive?God, who might have directed the assassin's dagger so as toend your career in a moment, has given you this quarter ofan hour for repentance. Reflect, then, wretched man, andrepent."

　　"No," said Caderousse, "no; I will not repent. There is noGod; there is no providence -- all comes by chance." --

　　"There is a providence; there is a God," said Monte Cristo,"of whom you are a striking proof, as you lie in utterdespair, denying him, while I stand before you, rich, happy,safe and entreating that God in whom you endeavor not tobelieve, while in your heart you still believe in him."

　　"But who are you, then?" asked Caderousse, fixing his dyingeyes on the count. "Look well at me!" said Monte Cristo,putting the light near his face. "Well, the abbe -- the AbbeBusoni." Monte Cristo took off the wig which disfigured him,and let fall his black hair, which added so much to thebeauty of his pallid features. "Oh?" said Caderousse,thunderstruck, "but for that black hair, I should say youwere the Englishman, Lord Wilmore."

　　"I am neither the Abbe Busoni nor Lord Wilmore," said MonteCristo; "think again, -- do you not recollect me?" Those wasa magic effect in the count's words, which once more revivedthe exhausted powers of the miserable man. "Yes, indeed,"said he; "I think I have seen you and known you formerly."

　　"Yes, Caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once."

　　"Who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let medie?"

　　"Because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal. Hadit been possible to save you, I should have considered itanother proof of God's mercy, and I would again haveendeavored to restore you, I swear by my father's tomb."

　　"By your father's tomb!" said Caderousse, supported by asupernatural power, and half-raising himself to see moredistinctly the man who had just taken the oath which all menhold sacred; "who, then, are you?" The count had watched theapproach of death. He knew this was the last struggle. Heapproached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a calmand melancholy look, he whispered, "I am -- I am" -- And hisalmost closed lips uttered a name so low that the counthimself appeared afraid to hear it. Caderousse, who hadraised himself on his knees, and stretched out his arm,tried to draw back, then clasping his hands, and raisingthem with a desperate effort, "O my God, my God!" said he,"pardon me for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou artindeed man's father in heaven, and his judge on earth. MyGod, my Lord, I have long despised thee! Pardon me, my God;receive me, O my Lord!" Caderousse sighed deeply, and fellback with a groan. The blood no longer flowed from hiswounds. He was dead.

　　"One!" said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on thecorpse, disfigured by so awful a death. Ten minutesafterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the oneaccompanied by the porter, the other by Ali, and werereceived by the Abbe Busoni, who was praying by the side ofthe corpse.

　　Chapter 84Beauchamp.

　　The daring attempt to rob the count was the topic ofconversation throughout Paris for the next fortnight. Thedying man had signed a deposition declaring Benedetto to bethe assassin. The police had orders to make the strictestsearch for the murderer. Caderousse's knife, dark lantern,bunch of keys, and clothing, excepting the waistcoat, whichcould not be found, were deposited at the registry; thecorpse was conveyed to the morgue. The count told every onethat this adventure had happened during his absence atAuteuil, and that he only knew what was related by the AbbeBusoni, who that evening, by mere chance, had requested topass the night in his house, to examine some valuable booksin his library. Bertuccio alone turned pale wheneverBenedetto's name was mentioned in his presence, but therewas no reason why any one should notice his doing so.Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was preparinghis brief with the same ardor that he was accustomed toexercise when required to speak in criminal cases.

　　But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligentsearch had been unsuccessful; the attempted robbery and themurder of the robber by his comrade were almost forgotten inanticipation of the approaching marriage of MademoiselleDanglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti. It was expectedthat this wedding would shortly take place, as the young manwas received at the banker's as the betrothed. Letters hadbeen despatched to M. Cavalcanti, as the count's father, whohighly approved of the union, regretted his inability toleave Parma at that time, and promised a wedding gift of ahundred and fifty thousand livres. It was agreed that thethree millions should be intrusted to Danglars to invest;some persons had warned the young man of the circumstancesof his future father-in-law, who had of late sustainedrepeated losses; but with sublime disinterestedness andconfidence the young man refused to listen, or to express asingle doubt to the baron. The baron adored Count AndreaCavalcanti: not so Mademoiselle Eugenie Danglars. With aninstinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered Andrea'sattentions in order to get rid of Morcerf; but when Andreaurged his suit, she betrayed an entire dislike to him. Thebaron might possibly have perceived it, but, attributing itto a caprice, feigned ignorance.

　　The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired. Morcerfappreciated the advice of Monte Cristo to let things dieaway of their own accord. No one had taken up the remarkabout the general, and no one had recognized in the officerwho betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble count in theHouse of Peers. Albert, however felt no less insulted; thefew lines which had irritated him were certainly intended asan insult. Besides, the manner in which Beauchamp had closedthe conference left a bitter recollection in his heart. Hecherished the thought of the duel, hoping to conceal itstrue cause even from his seconds. Beauchamp had not beenseen since the day he visited Albert, and those of whom thelatter inquired always told him he was out on a journeywhich would detain him some days. Where he was no one knew.

　　One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre, whoannounced Beauchamp. Albert rubbed his eyes, ordered hisservant to introduce him into the small smoking-room on theground-floor, dressed himself quickly, and went down. Hefound Beauchamp pacing the room; on perceiving him Beauchampstopped. "Your arrival here, without waiting my visit atyour house to-day, looks well, sir," said Albert. "Tell me,may I shake hands with you, saying, `Beauchamp, acknowledgeyou have injured me, and retain my friendship,' or must Isimply propose to you a choice of arms?"

　　"Albert," said Beauchamp, with a look of sorrow whichstupefied the young man, "let us first sit down and talk."

　　"Rather, sir, before we sit down, I must demand youranswer."

　　"Albert," said the journalist, "these are questions which itis difficult to answer."

　　"I will facilitate it by repeating the question, `Will you,or will you not, retract?'"

　　"Morcerf, it is not enough to answer `yes' or `no' toquestions which concern the honor, the social interest, andthe life of such a man as Lieutenant-general the Count ofMorcerf, peer of France."

　　"What must then be done?"

　　"What I have done, Albert. I reasoned thus -- money, time,and fatigue are nothing compared with the reputation andinterests of a whole family; probabilities will not suffice,only facts will justify a deadly combat with a friend. If Istrike with the sword, or discharge the contents of a pistolat man with whom, for three years, I have been on terms ofintimacy, I must, at least, know why I do so; I must meethim with a heart at ease, and that quiet conscience which aman needs when his own arm must save his life."

　　"Well," said Morcerf, impatiently, "what does all thismean?"

　　"It means that I have just returned from Yanina."

　　"From Yanina?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Impossible!"

　　"Here is my passport; examine the visa -- Geneva, Milan,Venice, Trieste, Delvino, Yanina. Will you believe thegovernment of a republic, a kingdom, and an empire?" Albertcast his eyes on the passport, then raised them inastonishment to Beauchamp. "You have been to Yanina?" saidhe.

　　"Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simplelord, like that Englishman who came to demand satisfactionthree or four months since, and whom I killed to get rid of,I should not have taken this trouble; but I thought thismark of consideration due to you. I took a week to go,another to return, four days of quarantine, and forty-eighthours to stay there; that makes three weeks. I returned lastnight, and here I am."

　　"What circumlocution! How long you are before you tell mewhat I most wish to know?"

　　"Because, in truth, Albert" --

　　"You hesitate?"

　　"Yes, -- I fear."

　　"You fear to acknowledge that your correspondent hisdeceived you? Oh, no self-love, Beauchamp. Acknowledge it,Beauchamp; your courage cannot be doubted."

　　"Not so," murmured the journalist; "on the contrary" --

　　Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, butthe words died on his lips. "My friend," said Beauchamp, inthe most affectionate tone, "I should gladly make anapology; but, alas," --

　　"But what?"

　　"The paragraph was correct, my friend."

　　"What? That French officer" --

　　"Yes."

　　"Fernand?"

　　"Yes."

　　"The traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whoseservice he was" --

　　"Pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!" Albertadvanced furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latterrestrained him more by a mild look than by his extendedhand.

　　"My friend," said he, "here is a proof of it."

　　Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of fournotable inhabitants of Yanina, proving that Colonel FernandMondego, in the service of Ali Tepelini, had surrendered thecastle for two million crowns. The signatures were perfectlylegal. Albert tottered and fell overpowered in a chair. Itcould no longer be doubted; the family name was fully given.After a moment's mournful silence, his heart overflowed, andhe gave way to a flood of tears. Beauchamp, who had watchedwith sincere pity the young man's paroxysm of grief,approached him. "Now, Albert," said he, "you understand me-- do you not? I wished to see all, and to judge ofeverything for myself, hoping the explanation would be inyour father's favor, and that I might do him justice. But,on the contrary, the particulars which are given prove thatFernand Mondego, raised by Ali Pasha to the rank ofgovernor-general, is no other than Count Fernand of Morcerf;then, recollecting the honor you had done me, in admittingme to your friendship, I hastened to you."

　　Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face withboth hands, as if to prevent the light from reaching him. "Ihastened to you," continued Beauchamp, "to tell you, Albert,that in this changing age, the faults of a father cannotrevert upon his children. Few have passed through thisrevolutionary period, in the midst of which we were born,without some stain of infamy or blood to soil the uniform ofthe soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. Now I have theseproofs, Albert, and I am in your confidence, no human powercan force me to a duel which your own conscience wouldreproach you with as criminal, but I come to offer you whatyou can no longer demand of me. Do you wish these proofs,these attestations, which I alone possess, to be destroyed?Do you wish this frightful secret to remain with us?Confided to me, it shall never escape my lips; say, Albert,my friend, do you wish it?"

　　Albert threw himself on Beauchamp's neck. "Ah, noblefellow!" cried he.

　　"Take these," said Beauchamp, presenting the papers toAlbert.

　　Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them inpieces, and trembling lest the least vestige should escapeand one day appear to confront him, he approached thewax-light, always kept burning for cigars, and burned everyfragment. "Dear, excellent friend," murmured Albert, stillburning the papers.

　　"Let all be forgotten as a sorrowful dream," said Beauchamp;"let it vanish as the last sparks from the blackened paper,and disappear as the smoke from those silent ashes."

　　"Yes, yes," said Albert, "and may there remain only theeternal friendship which I promised to my deliverer, whichshall be transmitted to our children's children, and shallalways remind me that I owe my life and the honor of my nameto you, -- for had this been known, oh, Beauchamp, I shouldhave destroyed myself; or, -- no, my poor mother! I couldnot have killed her by the same blow, -- I should have fledfrom my country."

　　"Dear Albert," said Beauchamp. But this sudden andfactitious joy soon forsook the young man, and was succeededby a still greater grief.

　　"Well," said Beauchamp, "what still oppresses you, myfriend?"

　　"I am broken-hearted," said Albert. "Listen, Beauchamp! Icannot thus, in a moment relinquish the respect, theconfidence, and pride with which a father's untarnished nameinspires a son. Oh, Beauchamp, Beauchamp, how shall I nowapproach mine? Shall I draw back my forehead from hisembrace, or withhold my hand from his? I am the mostwretched of men. Ah, my mother, my poor mother!" saidAlbert, gazing through his tears at his mother's portrait;"if you know this, how much must you suffer!"

　　"Come," said Beauchamp, taking both his hands, "takecourage, my friend."

　　"But how came that first note to be inserted in yourjournal? Some unknown enemy -- an invisible foe -- has donethis."

　　"The more must you fortify yourself, Albert. Let no trace ofemotion be visible on your countenance, bear your grief asthe cloud bears within it ruin and death -- a fatal secret,known only when the storm bursts. Go, my friend, reserveyour strength for the moment when the crash shall come."

　　"You think, then, all is not over yet?" said Albert,horror-stricken.

　　"I think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible. Bythe way" --

　　"What?" said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.

　　"Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?"

　　"Why do you ask me now?"

　　"Because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement isconnected with the person of whom we were speaking."

　　"How?" said Albert, whose brow reddened; "you think M.Danglars" --

　　"I ask you only how your engagement stands? Pray put noconstruction on my words I do not mean they should convey,and give them no undue weight."

　　"No." said Albert, "the engagement is broken off."

　　"Well," said Beauchamp. Then, seeing the young man was aboutto relapse into melancholy, "Let us go out, Albert," saidhe; "a ride in the wood in the phaeton, or on horseback,will refresh you; we will then return to breakfast, and youshall attend to your affairs, and I to mine."

　　"Willingly," said Albert; "but let us walk. I think a littleexertion would do me good." The two friends walked out onthe fortress. When arrived at the Madeleine, -- "Since weare out," said Beauchamp, "let us call on M. de MonteCristo; he is admirably adapted to revive one's spirits,because he never interrogates, and in my opinion those whoask no questions are the best comforters."

　　"Gladly," said Albert; "I love him -- let us call."

　　Chapter 85The Journey.

　　Monte Cristo uttered a joyful exclamation on seeing theyoung men together. "Ah, ha!" said he, "I hope all is over,explained and settled."

　　"Yes," said Beauchamp; "the absurd reports have died away,and should they be renewed, I would be the first to opposethem; so let us speak no more of it."

　　"Albert will tell you," replied the count "that I gave himthe same advice. Look," added he. "I am finishing the mostexecrable morning's work."

　　"What is it?" said Albert; "arranging your papers,apparently."

　　"My papers, thank God, no, -- my papers are all in capitalorder, because I have none; but M. Cavalcanti's."

　　"M. Cavalcanti's?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom thecount is introducing?" said Morcerf.

　　"Let us not misunderstand each other," replied Monte Cristo;"I introduce my one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti."

　　"And who," said Albert with a forced smile, "is to marryMademoiselle Danglars instead of me, which grieves mecruelly."

　　"What? Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?"asked Beauchamp.

　　"Certainly; do you come from the end of the world?" saidMonte Cristo; "you, a journalist, the husband of renown? Itis the talk of all Paris."

　　"And you, count, have made this match?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"I? Silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report.I make a match? No, you do not know me; I have done all inmy power to oppose it."

　　"Ah, I understand," said Beauchamp, "on our friend Albert'saccount."

　　"On my account?" said the young man; "oh, no, indeed, thecount will do me the justice to assert that I have, on thecontrary, always entreated him to break off my engagement,and happily it is ended. The count pretends I have not himto thank; -- so be it -- I will erect an altar Deo ignoto."

　　"Listen," said Monte Cristo; "I have had little to do withit, for I am at variance both with the father-in-law and theyoung man; there is only Mademoiselle Eugenie, who appearsbut little charmed with the thoughts of matrimony, and who,seeing how little I was disposed to persuade her to renounceher dear liberty, retains any affection for me."

　　"And do you say this wedding is at hand?"

　　"Oh, yes, in spite of all I could say. I do not know theyoung man; he is said to be of good family and rich, but Inever trust to vague assertions. I have warned M. Danglarsof it till I am tired, but he is fascinated with hisLuccanese. I have even informed him of a circumstance Iconsider very serious; the young man was either charmed byhis nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost by his tutor, Iscarcely know which. But I do know his father lost sight ofhim for more than ten years; what he did during these tenyears, God only knows. Well, all that was useless. They havecommissioned me to write to the major to demand papers, andhere they are. I send them, but like Pilate -- washing myhands."

　　"And what does Mademoiselle d'Armilly say to you for robbingher of her pupil?"

　　"Oh, well, I don't know; but I understand that she is goingto Italy. Madame Danglars asked me for letters ofrecommendation for the impresari; I gave her a few lines forthe director of the Valle Theatre, who is under someobligation to me. But what is the matter, Albert? you lookdull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love withMademoiselle Eugenie?"

　　"I am not aware of it," said Albert, smiling sorrowfully.Beauchamp turned to look at some paintings. "But," continuedMonte Cristo, "you are not in your usual spirits?"

　　"I have a dreadful headache," said Albert.

　　"Well, my dear viscount," said Monte Cristo, "I have aninfallible remedy to propose to you."

　　"What is that?" asked the young man.

　　"A change."

　　"Indeed?" said Albert.

　　"Yes; and as I am just now excessively annoyed, I shall gofrom home. Shall we go together?"

　　"You annoyed, count?" said Beauchamp; "and by what?"

　　"Ah, you think very lightly of it; I should like to see youwith a brief preparing in your house."

　　"What brief?"

　　"The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiableassassin -- some brigand escaped from the gallowsapparently."

　　"True," said Beauchamp; "I saw it in the paper. Who is thisCaderousse?"

　　"Some provincial, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of himat Marseilles, and M. Danglars recollects having seen him.Consequently, the procureur is very active in the affair,and the prefect of police very much interested; and, thanksto that interest, for which I am very grateful, they send meall the robbers of Paris and the neighborhood, underpretence of their being Caderousse's murderers, so that inthree months, if this continue, every robber and assassin inFrance will have the plan of my house at his fingers' end. Iam resolved to desert them and go to some remote corner ofthe earth, and shall be happy if you will accompany me,viscount."

　　"Willingly."

　　"Then it is settled?"

　　"Yes, but where?"

　　"I have told you, where the air is pure, where every soundsoothes, where one is sure to be humbled, however proud maybe his nature. I love that humiliation, I, who am master ofthe universe, as was Augustus."

　　"But where are you really going?"

　　"To sea, viscount; you know I am a sailor. I was rocked whenan infant in the arms of old ocean, and on the bosom of thebeautiful Amphitrite; I have sported with the green mantleof the one and the azure robe of the other; I love the seaas a mistress, and pine if I do not often see her."

　　"Let us go, count."

　　"To sea?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You accept my proposal?"

　　"I do."

　　"Well, Viscount, there will be in my court-yard this eveninga good travelling britzka, with four post-horses, in whichone may rest as in a bed. M. Beauchamp, it holds four verywell, will you accompany us?"

　　"Thank you, I have just returned from sea."

　　"What? you have been to sea?"

　　"Yes; I have just made a little excursion to the BorromeanIslands."*

　　* Lake Maggiore.

　　"What of that? come with us," said Albert.

　　"No, dear Morcerf; you know I only refuse when the thing isimpossible. Besides, it is important," added he in a lowtone, "that I should remain in Paris just now to watch thepaper."

　　"Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend," said Albert;"yes, you are right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try todiscover the enemy who made this disclosure." Albert andBeauchamp parted, the last pressure of their handsexpressing what their tongues could not before a stranger.

　　"Beauchamp is a worthy fellow," said Monte Cristo, when thejournalist was gone; "is he not, Albert?"

　　"Yes, and a sincere friend; I love him devotedly. But now weare alone, -- although it is immaterial to me, -- where arewe going?"

　　"Into Normandy, if you like."

　　"Delightful; shall we be quite retired? have no society, noneighbors?"

　　"Our companions will be riding-horses, dogs to hunt with,and a fishing-boat."

　　"Exactly what I wish for; I will apprise my mother of myintention, and return to you."

　　"But shall you be allowed to go into Normandy?"

　　"I may go where I please."

　　"Yes, I am aware you may go alone, since I once met you inItaly -- but to accompany the mysterious Monte Cristo?"

　　"You forget, count, that I have often told you of the deepinterest my mother takes in you."

　　"`Woman is fickle.' said Francis I.; `woman is like a waveof the sea,' said Shakespeare; both the great king and thegreat poet ought to have known woman's nature well."

　　"Woman's, yes; my mother is not woman, but a woman."

　　"As I am only a humble foreigner, you must pardon me if I donot understand all the subtle refinements of your language."

　　"What I mean to say is, that my mother is not quick to giveher confidence, but when she does she never changes."

　　"Ah, yes, indeed," said Monte Cristo with a sigh; "and doyou think she is in the least interested in me?"

　　"I repeat it, you must really be a very strange and superiorman, for my mother is so absorbed by the interest you haveexcited, that when I am with her she speaks of no one else."

　　"And does she try to make you dislike me?"

　　"On the contrary, she often says, `Morcerf, I believe thecount has a noble nature; try to gain his esteem.'"

　　"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo, sighing.

　　"You see, then," said Albert, "that instead of opposing, shewill encourage me."

　　"Adieu, then, until five o'clock; be punctual, and we shallarrive at twelve or one."

　　"At Treport?"

　　"Yes; or in the neighborhood."

　　"But can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?"

　　"Easily," said Monte Cristo.

　　"You are certainly a prodigy; you will soon not only surpassthe railway, which would not be very difficult in France,but even the telegraph."

　　"But, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in lessthan seven or eight hours, do not keep me waiting."

　　"Do not fear, I have little to prepare." Monte Cristo smiledas he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment absorbed indeep meditation. But passing his hand across his forehead asif to dispel his revery, he rang the bell twice andBertuccio entered. "Bertuccio," said he, "I intend goingthis evening to Normandy, instead of to-morrow or the nextday. You will have sufficient time before five o'clock;despatch a messenger to apprise the grooms at the firststation. M. de Morcerf will accompany me." Bertuccio obeyedand despatched a courier to Pontoise to say thetravelling-carriage would arrive at six o'clock. FromPontoise another express was sent to the next stage, and insix hours all the horses stationed on the road were ready.Before his departure, the count went to Haidee's apartments,told her his intention, and resigned everything to her care.Albert was punctual. The journey soon became interestingfrom its rapidity, of which Morcerf had formed no previousidea. "Truly," said Monte Cristo, "with your posthorsesgoing at the rate of two leagues an hour, and that absurdlaw that one traveller shall not pass another withoutpermission, so that an invalid or ill-tempered traveller maydetain those who are well and active, it is impossible tomove; I escape this annoyance by travelling with my ownpostilion and horses; do I not, Ali?"

　　The count put his head out of the window and whistled, andthe horses appeared to fly. The carriage rolled with athundering noise over the pavement, and every one turned tonotice the dazzling meteor. Ali, smiling, repeated thesound, grasped the reins with a firm hand, and spurred hishorses, whose beautiful manes floated in the breeze. Thischild of the desert was in his element, and with his blackface and sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud of dust heraised, like the genius of the simoom and the god of thehurricane. "I never knew till now the delight of speed,"said Morcerf, and the last cloud disappeared from his brow;"but where the devil do you get such horses? Are they madeto order?"

　　"Precisely," said the count; "six years since I bought ahorse in Hungary remarkable for its swiftness. Thethirty-two that we shall use to-night are its progeny; theyare all entirely black, with the exception of a star uponthe forehead."

　　"That is perfectly admirable; but what do you do, count,with all these horses?"

　　"You see, I travel with them."

　　"But you are not always travelling."

　　"When I no longer require them, Bertuccio will sell them,and he expects to realize thirty or forty thousand francs bythe sale."

　　"But no monarch in Europe will be wealthy enough to purchasethem."

　　"Then he will sell them to some Eastern vizier, who willempty his coffers to purchase them, and refill them byapplying the bastinado to his subjects."

　　"Count, may I suggest one idea to you?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"It is that, next to you, Bertuccio must be the richestgentleman in Europe."

　　"You are mistaken, viscount; I believe he has not a franc inhis possession."

　　"Then he must be a wonder. My dear count, if you tell memany more marvellous things, I warn you I shall not believethem."

　　"I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M. Albert. Tellme, why does a steward rob his master?"

　　"Because, I suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the loveof robbing."

　　"You are mistaken; it is because he has a wife and family,and ambitious desires for himself and them. Also because heis not sure of always retaining his situation, and wishes toprovide for the future. Now, M. Bertuccio is alone in theworld; he uses my property without accounting for the use hemakes of it; he is sure never to leave my service."

　　"Why?"

　　"Because I should never get a better."

　　"Probabilities are deceptive."

　　"But I deal in certainties; he is the best servant over whomone has the power of life and death."

　　"Do you possess that right over Bertuccio?"

　　"Yes."

　　There are words which close a conversation with an irondoor; such was the count's "yes." The whole journey wasperformed with equal rapidity; the thirty-two horses,dispersed over seven stages, brought them to theirdestination in eight hours. At midnight they arrived at thegate of a beautiful park. The porter was in attendance; hehad been apprised by the groom of the last stage of thecount's approach. At half past two in the morning Morcerfwas conducted to his apartments, where a bath and supperwere prepared. The servant who had travelled at the back ofthe carriage waited on him; Baptistin, who rode in front,attended the count. Albert bathed, took his supper, and wentto bed. All night he was lulled by the melancholy noise ofthe surf. On rising, he went to his window, which opened ona terrace, having the sea in front, and at the back a prettypark bounded by a small forest. In a creek lay a littlesloop, with a narrow keel and high masts, bearing on itsflag the Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain on a seaazure, with a cross gules on the shield. Around the schoonerlay a number of small fishing-boats belonging to thefishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjectsawaiting orders from their queen. There, as in every spotwhere Monte Cristo stopped, if but for two days, luxuryabounded and life went on with the utmost ease.

　　Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all theaccoutrements for hunting; a lofty room on the ground-floorcontaining all the ingenious instruments the English --eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are patient andsluggish -- have invented for fishing. The day passed inpursuing those exercises in which Monte Cristo excelled.They killed a dozen pheasants in the park, as many trout inthe stream, dined in a summer-house overlooking the ocean,and took tea in the library.

　　Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completelyexhausted with the exercise which invigorated Monte Cristo,was sleeping in an arm-chair near the window, while thecount was designing with his architect the plan of aconservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at fullspeed on the high road made Albert look up. He wasdisagreeably surprised to see his own valet de chambre, whomhe had not brought, that he might not inconvenience MonteCristo.

　　"Florentin here!" cried he, starting up; "is my mother ill?"And he hastened to the door. Monte Cristo watched and sawhim approach the valet, who drew a small sealed parcel fromhis pocket, containing a newspaper and a letter. "From whomis this?" said he eagerly. "From M. Beauchamp," repliedFlorentin.

　　"Did he send you?"

　　"Yes, sir; he sent for me to his house, gave me money for myjourney, procured a horse, and made me promise not to stoptill I had reached you, I have come in fifteen hours."

　　Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek onreading the first line, and seized the paper. His sight wasdimmed, his legs sank under him, and he would have fallenhad not Florentin supported him.

　　"Poor young man," said Monte Cristo in a low voice; "it isthen true that the sin of the father shall fall on thechildren to the third and fourth generation." MeanwhileAlbert had revived, and, continuing to read, he threw backhis head, saying, "Florentin, is your horse fit to returnimmediately?"

　　"It is a poor lame post-horse."

　　"In what state was the house when you left?"

　　"All was quiet, but on returning from M. Beauchamp's, Ifound madame in tears: she had sent for me to know when youwould return. I told her my orders from M. Beauchamp; shefirst extended her arms to prevent me, but after a moment'sreflection, `Yes, go, Florentin,' said she, `and may he comequickly.'"

　　"Yes, my mother," said Albert, "I will return, and woe tothe infamous wretch! But first of all I must get there."

　　He went back to the room where he had left Monte Cristo.Five minutes had sufficed to make a complete transformationin his appearance. His voice had become rough and hoarse;his face was furrowed with wrinkles; his eyes burned underthe blue-veined lids, and he tottered like a drunken man."Count," said he, "I thank you for your hospitality, which Iwould gladly have enjoyed longer; but I must return toParis."

　　"What has happened?"

　　"A great misfortune, more important to me than life. Don'tquestion me, I beg of you, but lend me a horse."

　　"My stables are at your command, viscount; but you will killyourself by riding on horseback. Take a post-chaise or acarriage."

　　"No, it would delay me, and I need the fatigue you warn meof; it will do me good." Albert reeled as if he had beenshot, and fell on a chair near the door. Monte Cristo didnot see this second manifestation of physical exhaustion; hewas at the window, calling, "Ali, a horse for M. de Morcerf-- quick! he is in a hurry!" These words restored Albert; hedarted from the room, followed by the count. "Thank you!"cried he, throwing himself on his horse. "Return as soon asyou can, Florentin. Must I use any password to procure ahorse?"

　　"Only dismount; another will be immediately saddled." Alberthesitated a moment. "You may think my departure strange andfoolish," said the young man; "you do not know how aparagraph in a newspaper may exasperate one. Read that,"said he, "when I am gone, that you may not be witness of myanger."

　　While the count picked up the paper he put spurs to hishorse, which leaped in astonishment at such an unusual

　　stimulus, and shot away with the rapidity of an arrow. Thecount watched him with a feeling of compassion, and when hehad completely disappeared, read as follows: --

　　"The French officer in the service of Ali Pasha of Yaninaalluded to three weeks since in the Impartial, who not onlysurrendered the castle of Yanina, but sold his benefactor tothe Turks, styled himself truly at that time Fernand, as ouresteemed contemporary states; but he has since added to hisChristian name a title of nobility and a family name. He nowcalls himself the Count of Morcerf, and ranks among thepeers."

　　Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so generouslydestroyed, appeared again like an armed phantom; and anotherpaper, deriving its information from some malicious source,had published two days after Albert's departure for Normandythe few lines which had rendered the unfortunate young manalmost crazy.

　　Chapter 86The Trial.

　　At eight o'clock in the morning Albert had arrived atBeauchamp's door. The valet de chambre had received ordersto usher him in at once. Beauchamp was in his bath. "Here Iam," said Albert.

　　"Well, my poor friend," replied Beauchamp, "I expected you."

　　"I need not say I think you are too faithful and too kind tohave spoken of that painful circumstance. Your having sentfor me is another proof of your affection. So, withoutlosing time, tell me, have you the slightest idea whencethis terrible blow proceeds?"

　　"I think I have some clew."

　　"But first tell me all the particulars of this shamefulplot." Beauchamp proceeded to relate to the young man, whowas overwhelmed with shame and grief, the following facts.Two days previously, the article had appeared in anotherpaper besides the Impartial, and, what was more serious, onethat was well known as a government paper. Beauchamp wasbreakfasting when he read the paragraph. He sent immediatelyfor a cabriolet, and hastened to the publisher's office.Although professing diametrically opposite principles fromthose of the editor of the other paper, Beauchamp -- as itsometimes, we may say often, happens -- was his intimatefriend. The editor was reading, with apparent delight, aleading article in the same paper on beet-sugar, probably acomposition of his own.

　　"Ah, pardieu," said Beauchamp, "with the paper in your hand,my friend, I need not tell you the cause of my visit."

　　"Are you interested in the sugar question?" asked the editorof the ministerial paper.

　　"No," replied Beauchamp, "I have not considered thequestion; a totally different subject interests me."

　　"What is it?"

　　"The article relative to Morcerf."

　　"Indeed? Is it not a curious affair?"

　　"So curious, that I think you are running a great risk of aprosecution for defamation of character."

　　"Not at all; we have received with the information all therequisite proofs, and we are quite sure M. de Morcerf willnot raise his voice against us; besides, it is rendering aservice to one's country to denounce these wretchedcriminals who are unworthy of the honor bestowed on them."Beauchamp was thunderstruck. "Who, then, has so correctlyinformed you?" asked he; "for my paper, which gave the firstinformation on the subject, has been obliged to stop forwant of proof; and yet we are more interested than you inexposing M. de Morcerf, as he is a peer of France, and weare of the opposition."

　　"Oh, that is very simple; we have not sought to scandalize.This news was brought to us. A man arrived yesterday fromYanina, bringing a formidable array of documents; and whenwe hesitated to publish the accusatory article, he told usit should be inserted in some other paper."

　　Beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit,and left the office to despatch a courier to Morcerf. But hehad been unable to send to Albert the following particulars,as the events had transpired after the messenger'sdeparture; namely, that the same day a great agitation wasmanifest in the House of Peers among the usually calmmembers of that dignified assembly. Every one had arrivedalmost before the usual hour, and was conversing on themelancholy event which was to attract the attention of thepublic towards one of their most illustrious colleagues.Some were perusing the article, others making comments andrecalling circumstances which substantiated the chargesstill more. The Count of Morcerf was no favorite with hiscolleagues. Like all upstarts, he had had recourse to agreat deal of haughtiness to maintain his position. The truenobility laughed at him, the talented repelled him, and thehonorable instinctively despised him. He was, in fact, inthe unhappy position of the victim marked for sacrifice; thefinger of God once pointed at him, every one was prepared toraise the hue and cry.

　　The Count of Morcerf alone was ignorant of the news. He didnot take in the paper containing the defamatory article, andhad passed the morning in writing letters and in trying ahorse. He arrived at his usual hour, with a proud look andinsolent demeanor; he alighted, passed through thecorridors, and entered the house without observing thehesitation of the door-keepers or the coolness of hiscolleagues. Business had already been going on for half anhour when he entered. Every one held the accusing paper,but, as usual, no one liked to take upon himself theresponsibility of the attack. At length an honorable peer,Morcerf's acknowledged enemy, ascended the tribune with thatsolemnity which announced that the expected moment hadarrived. There was an impressive silence; Morcerf alone knewnot why such profound attention was given to an orator whowas not always listened to with so much complacency. Thecount did not notice the introduction, in which the speakerannounced that his communication would be of that vitalimportance that it demanded the undivided attention of theHouse; but at the mention of Yanina and Colonel Fernand, heturned so frightfully pale that every member shuddered andfixed his eyes upon him. Moral wounds have this peculiarity,-- they may be hidden, but they never close; always painful,always ready to bleed when touched, they remain fresh andopen in the heart.

　　The article having been read during the painful hush thatfollowed, a universal shudder pervaded the assembly. andimmediately the closest attention was given to the orator ashe resumed his remarks. He stated his scruples and thedifficulties of the case; it was the honor of M. de Morcerf,and that of the whole House, he proposed to defend, byprovoking a debate on personal questions, which are alwayssuch painful themes of discussion. He concluded by callingfor an investigation, which might dispose of the calumniousreport before it had time to spread, and restore M. deMorcerf to the position he had long held in public opinion.Morcerf was so completely overwhelmed by this great andunexpected calamity that he could scarcely stammer a fewwords as he looked around on the assembly. This timidity,which might proceed from the astonishment of innocence aswell as the shame of guilt, conciliated some in his favor;for men who are truly generous are always ready tocompassionate when the misfortune of their enemy surpassesthe limits of their hatred.

　　The president put it to the vote, and it was decided thatthe investigation should take place. The count was askedwhat time he required to prepare his defence. Morcerf'scourage had revived when he found himself alive after thishorrible blow. "My lords," answered he, "it is not by time Icould repel the attack made on me by enemies unknown to me,and, doubtless, hidden in obscurity; it is immediately, andby a thunderbolt, that I must repel the flash of lightningwhich, for a moment, startled me. Oh, that I could, insteadof taking up this defence, shed my last drop of blood toprove to my noble colleagues that I am their equal inworth." These words made a favorable impression on behalf ofthe accused. "I demand, then, that the examination shalltake place as soon as possible, and I will furnish the housewith all necessary information."

　　"What day do you fix?" asked the president.

　　"To-day I am at your service," replied the count. Thepresident rang the bell. "Does the House approve that theexamination should take place to-day?"

　　"Yes," was the unanimous answer.

　　A committee of twelve members was chosen to examine theproofs brought forward by Morcerf. The investigation wouldbegin at eight o'clock that evening in the committee-room,and if postponement were necessary, the proceedings would beresumed each evening at the same hour. Morcerf asked leaveto retire; he had to collect the documents he had long beenpreparing against this storm, which his sagacity hadforeseen.

　　Albert listened, trembling now with hope, then with anger,and then again with shame, for from Beauchamp's confidencehe knew his father was guilty, and he asked himself how,since he was guilty, he could prove his innocence. Beauchamphesitated to continue his narrative. "What next?" askedAlbert.

　　"What next? My friend, you impose a painful task on me. Mustyou know all?"

　　"Absolutely; and rather from your lips than another's."

　　"Muster up all your courage, then, for never have yourequired it more." Albert passed his hand over his forehead,as if to try his strength, as a man who is preparing todefend his life proves his shield and bends his sword. Hethought himself strong enough, for he mistook fever forenergy. "Go on," said he.

　　"The evening arrived; all Paris was in expectation. Manysaid your father had only to show himself to crush thecharge against him; many others said he would not appear;while some asserted that they had seen him start forBrussels; and others went to the police-office to inquire ifhe had taken out a passport. I used all my influence withone of the committee, a young peer of my acquaintance, toget admission to one of the galleries. He called for me atseven o'clock, and, before any one had arrived, asked one ofthe door-keepers to place me in a box. I was concealed by acolumn, and might witness the whole of the terrible scenewhich was about to take place. At eight o'clock all were intheir places, and M. de Morcerf entered at the last stroke.He held some papers in his hand; his countenance was calm,and his step firm, and he was dressed with great care in hismilitary uniform, which was buttoned completely up to thechin. His presence produced a good effect. The committee wasmade up of Liberals, several of whom came forward to shakehands with him."

　　Albert felt his heart bursting at these particulars, butgratitude mingled with his sorrow: he would gladly haveembraced those who had given his father this proof of esteemat a moment when his honor was so powerfully attacked. "Atthis moment one of the door-keepers brought in a letter forthe president. `You are at liberty to speak, M. de Morcerf,'said the president, as he unsealed the letter; and the countbegan his defence, I assure you, Albert, in a most eloquentand skilful manner. He produced documents proving that theVizier of Yanina had up to the last moment honored him withhis entire confidence, since he had interested him with anegotiation of life and death with the emperor. He producedthe ring, his mark of authority, with which Ali Pashagenerally sealed his letters, and which the latter had givenhim, that he might, on his return at any hour of the day ornight, gain access to the presence, even in the harem.Unfortunately, the negotiation failed, and when he returnedto defend his benefactor, he was dead. `But,' said thecount, `so great was Ali Pasha's confidence, that on hisdeath-bed he resigned his favorite mistress and her daughterto my care.'" Albert started on hearing these words; thehistory of Haidee recurred to him, and he remembered whatshe had said of that message and the ring, and the manner inwhich she had been sold and made a slave. "And what effectdid this discourse produce?" anxiously inquired Albert. "Iacknowledge it affected me, and, indeed, all the committeealso," said Beauchamp.

　　"Meanwhile, the president carelessly opened the letter whichhad been brought to him; but the first lines aroused hisattention; he read them again and again, and fixing his eyeson M. de Morcerf, `Count,' said he, `you have said that theVizier of Yanina confided his wife and daughter to yourcare?' -- `Yes, sir,' replied Morcerf; `but in that, likeall the rest, misfortune pursued me. On my return, Vasilikiand her daughter Haidee had disappeared.' -- `Did you knowthem?' -- `My intimacy with the pasha and his unlimitedconfidence had gained me an introduction to them, and I hadseen them above twenty times.'

　　"`Have you any idea what became of them?' -- `Yes, sir; Iheard they had fallen victims to their sorrow, and, perhaps,to their poverty. I was not rich; my life was in constantdanger; I could not seek them, to my great regret.' Thepresident frowned imperceptibly. `Gentlemen,' said he, `youhave heard the Comte de Morcerf's defence. Can you, sir,produce any witnesses to the truth of what you haveasserted?' -- `Alas, no, monsieur,' replied the count; `allthose who surrounded the vizier, or who knew me at hiscourt, are either dead or gone away, I know not where. Ibelieve that I alone, of all my countrymen, survived thatdreadful war. I have only the letters of Ali Tepelini, whichI have placed before you; the ring, a token of hisgood-will, which is here; and, lastly, the most convincingproof I can offer, after an anonymous attack, and that isthe absence of any witness against my veracity and thepurity of my military life.' A murmur of approbation ranthrough the assembly; and at this moment, Albert, hadnothing more transpired, your father's cause had beengained. It only remained to put it to the vote, when thepresident resumed: `Gentlemen and you, monsieur, -- you willnot be displeased, I presume, to listen to one who callshimself a very important witness, and who has just presentedhimself. He is, doubtless, come to prove the perfectinnocence of our colleague. Here is a letter I have justreceived on the subject; shall it be read, or shall it bepassed over? and shall we take no notice of this incident?'M. de Morcerf turned pale, and clinched his hands on thepapers he held. The committee decided to hear the letter;the count was thoughtful and silent. The president read: --

　　"`Mr. President, -- I can furnish the committee of inquiryinto the conduct of the Lieutenant-General the Count ofMorcerf in Epirus and in Macedonia with importantparticulars.'

　　"The president paused, and the count turned pale. Thepresident looked at his auditors. `Proceed,' was heard onall sides. The president resumed: --

　　"`I was on the spot at the death of Ali Pasha. I was presentduring his last moments. I know what is become of Vasilikiand Haidee. I am at the command of the committee, and evenclaim the honor of being heard. I shall be in the lobby whenthis note is delivered to you.'

　　"`And who is this witness, or rather this enemy?' asked thecount, in a tone in which there was a visible alteration.`We shall know, sir,' replied the president. `Is thecommittee willing to hear this witness?' -- `Yes, yes,' theyall said at once. The door-keeper was called. `Is there anyone in the lobby?' said the president.

　　"`Yes, sir.' -- `Who is it?' -- `A woman, accompanied by aservant.' Every one looked at his neighbor. `Bring her in,'said the president. Five minutes after the door-keeper againappeared; all eyes were fixed on the door, and I," saidBeauchamp, "shared the general expectation and anxiety.Behind the door-keeper walked a woman enveloped in a largeveil, which completely concealed her. It was evident, fromher figure and the perfumes she had about her, that she wasyoung and fastidious in her tastes, but that was all. Thepresident requested her to throw aside her veil, and it wasthen seen that she was dressed in the Grecian costume, andwas remarkably beautiful."

　　"Ah," said Albert, "it was she."

　　"Who?"

　　"Haidee."

　　"Who told you that?"

　　"Alas, I guess it. But go on, Beauchamp. You see I am calmand strong. And yet we must be drawing near the disclosure."

　　"M. de Morcerf," continued Beauchamp, "looked at this womanwith surprise and terror. Her lips were about to pass hissentence of life or death. To the committee the adventurewas so extraordinary and curious, that the interest they hadfelt for the count's safety became now quite a secondarymatter. The president himself advanced to place a seat forthe young lady; but she declined availing herself of it. Asfor the count, he had fallen on his chair; it was evidentthat his legs refused to support him.

　　"`Madame,' said the president, `you have engaged to furnishthe committee with some important particulars respecting theaffair at Yanina, and you have stated that you were aneyewitness of the event.' -- `I was, indeed,' said thestranger, with a tone of sweet melancholy, and with thesonorous voice peculiar to the East.

　　"`But allow me to say that you must have been very youngthen.' -- `I was four years old; but as those events deeplyconcerned me, not a single detail has escaped my memory.' --`In what manner could these events concern you? and who areyou, that they should have made so deep an impression onyou?' -- `On them depended my father's life,' replied she.`I am Haidee, the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina,and of Vasiliki, his beloved wife.'

　　"The blush of mingled pride and modesty which suddenlysuffused the cheeks of the young woman, the brilliancy ofher eye, and her highly important communication, produced anindescribable effect on the assembly. As for the count, hecould not have been more overwhelmed if a thunderbolt hadfallen at his feet and opened an immense gulf before him.`Madame,' replied the president, bowing with profoundrespect, `allow me to ask one question; it shall be thelast: Can you prove the authenticity of what you have nowstated?' -- `I can, sir,' said Haidee, drawing from underher veil a satin satchel highly perfumed; `for here is theregister of my birth, signed by my father and his principalofficers, and that of my baptism, my father having consentedto my being brought up in my mother's faith, -- this latterhas been sealed by the grand primate of Macedonia andEpirus; and lastly (and perhaps the most important), therecord of the sale of my person and that of my mother to theArmenian merchant El-Kobbir, by the French officer, who, inhis infamous bargain with the Porte, had reserved as hispart of the booty the wife and daughter of his benefactor,whom he sold for the sum of four hundred thousand francs.' Agreenish pallor spread over the count's cheeks, and his eyesbecame bloodshot at these terrible imputations, which werelistened to by the assembly with ominous silence.

　　"Haidee, still calm, but with a calmness more dreadful thanthe anger of another would have been, handed to thepresident the record of her sale, written in Arabic. It hadbeen supposed some of the papers might be in the Arabian,Romaic, or Turkish language, and the interpreter of theHouse was in attendance. One of the noble peers, who wasfamiliar with the Arabic language, having studied it duringthe famous Egyptian campaign, followed with his eye as thetranslator read aloud: --

　　"`I, El-Kobbir, a slave-merchant, and purveyor of the haremof his highness, acknowledge having received fortransmission to the sublime emperor, from the French lord,the Count of Monte Cristo, an emerald valued at eighthundred thousand francs; as the ransom of a young Christianslave of eleven years of age, named Haidee, the acknowledgeddaughter of the late lord Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, andof Vasiliki, his favorite; she having been sold to me sevenyears previously, with her mother, who had died on arrivingat Constantinople, by a French colonel in the service of theVizier Ali Tepelini, named Fernand Mondego. Theabove-mentioned purchase was made on his highness's account,whose mandate I had, for the sum of four hundred thousandfrancs.

　　"`Given at Constantinople, by authority of his highness, inthe year 1247 of the Hegira.

　　"`Signed El-Kobbir.'

　　"`That this record should have all due authority, it shallbear the imperial seal, which the vendor is bound to haveaffixed to it.'

　　"Near the merchant's signature there was, indeed, the sealof the sublime emperor. A dreadful silence followed thereading of this document; the count could only stare, andhis gaze, fixed as if unconsciously on Haidee, seemed one offire and blood. `Madame,' said the president, `may referencebe made to the Count of Monte Cristo, who is now, I believe,in Paris?' -- `Sir,' replied Haidee, `the Count of MonteCristo, my foster-father, has been in Normandy the lastthree days.'

　　"`Who, then, has counselled you to take this step, one forwhich the court is deeply indebted to you, and which isperfectly natural, considering your birth and yourmisfortunes?' -- `Sir,' replied Haidee, `I have been led totake this step from a feeling of respect and grief. Althougha Christian, may God forgive me, I have always sought torevenge my illustrious father. Since I set my foot inFrance, and knew the traitor lived in Paris, I have watchedcarefully. I live retired in the house of my nobleprotector, but I do it from choice. I love retirement andsilence, because I can live with my thoughts andrecollections of past days. But the Count of Monte Cristosurrounds me with every paternal care, and I am ignorant ofnothing which passes in the world. I learn all in thesilence of my apartments, -- for instance, I see all thenewspapers, every periodical, as well as every new piece ofmusic; and by thus watching the course of the life ofothers, I learned what had transpired this morning in theHouse of Peers, and what was to take place this evening;then I wrote.'

　　"`Then,' remarked the president, `the Count of Monte Cristoknows nothing of your present proceedings?' -- `He is quiteunaware of them, and I have but one fear, which is that heshould disapprove of what I have done. But it is a gloriousday for me,' continued the young girl, raising her ardentgaze to heaven, `that on which I find at last an opportunityof avenging my father!'

　　"The count had not uttered one word the whole of this time.His colleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied hisprospects, blighted under the perfumed breath of a woman.His misery was depicted in sinister lines on hiscountenance. `M. de Morcerf,' said the president, `do yourecognize this lady as the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pashaof Yanina?' -- `No,' said Morcerf, attempting to rise, `itis a base plot, contrived by my enemies.' Haidee, whose eyeshad been fixed on the door, as if expecting some one, turnedhastily, and, seeing the count standing, shrieked, `You donot know me?' said she. `Well, I fortunately recognize you!You are Fernand Mondego, the French officer who led thetroops of my noble father! It is you who surrendered thecastle of Yanina! It is you who, sent by him toConstantinople, to treat with the emperor for the life ordeath of your benefactor, brought back a false mandategranting full pardon! It is you who, with that mandate,obtained the pasha's ring, which gave you authority overSelim, the fire-keeper! It is you who stabbed Selim. It isyou who sold us, my mother and me, to the merchant,El-Kobbir! Assassin, assassin, assassin, you have still onyour brow your master's blood! Look, gentlemen, all!'

　　"These words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm andevident truth, that every eye was fixed on the count'sforehead, and he himself passed his hand across it, as if hefelt Ali's blood still lingering there. `You positivelyrecognize M. de Morcerf as the officer, Fernand Mondego?' --`Indeed I do!' cried Haidee. `Oh, my mother, it was you whosaid, "You were free, you had a beloved father, you weredestined to be almost a queen. Look well at that man; it ishe who raised your father's head on the point of a spear; itis he who sold us; it is he who forsook us! Look well at hisright hand, on which he has a large wound; if you forgot hisfeatures, you would know him by that hand, into which fell,one by one, the gold pieces of the merchant El-Kobbir!" Iknow him! Ah, let him say now if he does not recognize me!'Each word fell like a dagger on Morcerf, and deprived him ofa portion of his energy; as she uttered the last, he hid hismutilated hand hastily in his bosom, and fell back on hisseat, overwhelmed by wretchedness and despair. This scenecompletely changed the opinion of the assembly respectingthe accused count.

　　"`Count of Morcerf,' said the president, `do not allowyourself to be cast down; answer. The justice of the courtis supreme and impartial as that of God; it will not sufferyou to be trampled on by your enemies without giving you anopportunity of defending yourself. Shall further inquiriesbe made? Shall two members of the House be sent to Yanina?Speak!' Morcerf did not reply. Then all the members lookedat each other with terror. They knew the count's energeticand violent temper; it must be, indeed, a dreadful blowwhich would deprive him of courage to defend himself. Theyexpected that his stupefied silence would be followed by afiery outburst. `Well,' asked the president, `what is yourdecision?'

　　"`I have no reply to make,' said the count in a low tone.

　　"`Has the daughter of Ali Tepelini spoken the truth?' saidthe president. `Is she, then, the terrible witness to whosecharge you dare not plead "Not guilty"? Have you reallycommitted the crimes of which you are accused?' The countlooked around him with an expression which might havesoftened tigers, but which could not disarm his judges. Thenhe raised his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then,immediately, as if he feared the roof would open and revealto his distressed view that second tribunal called heaven,and that other judge named God. Then, with a hasty movement,he tore open his coat, which seemed to stifle him, and flewfrom the room like a madman; his footstep was heard onemoment in the corridor, then the rattling of hiscarriage-wheels as he was driven rapidly away. `Gentlemen,'said the president, when silence was restored, `is the Countof Morcerf convicted of felony, treason, and conductunbecoming a member of this House?' -- `Yes,' replied allthe members of the committee of inquiry with a unanimousvoice.

　　"Haidee had remained until the close of the meeting. Sheheard the count's sentence pronounced without betraying anexpression of joy or pity; then drawing her veil over herface she bowed majestically to the councillors, and leftwith that dignified step which Virgil attributes to hisgoddesses."

　　Chapter 87The Challenge.

　　"Then," continued Beauchamp, "I took advantage of thesilence and the darkness to leave the house without beingseen. The usher who had introduced me was waiting for me atthe door, and he conducted me through the corridors to aprivate entrance opening into the Rue de Vaugirard. I leftwith mingled feelings of sorrow and delight. Excuse me,Albert, -- sorrow on your account, and delight with thatnoble girl, thus pursuing paternal vengeance. Yes, Albert,from whatever source the blow may have proceeded -- it maybe from an enemy, but that enemy is only the agent ofprovidence." Albert held his head between his hands; heraised his face, red with shame and bathed in tears, andseizing Beauchamp's arm, "My friend," said he, "my life isended. I cannot calmly say with you, `Providence has struckthe blow;' but I must discover who pursues me with thishatred, and when I have found him I shall kill him, or hewill kill me. I rely on your friendship to assist me,Beauchamp, if contempt has not banished it from your heart."

　　"Contempt, my friend? How does this misfortune affect you?No, happily that unjust prejudice is forgotten which madethe son responsible for the father's actions. Review yourlife, Albert; although it is only just beginning, did alovely summer's day ever dawn with greater purity than hasmarked the commencement of your career? No, Albert, take myadvice. You are young and rich -- leave Paris -- all is soonforgotten in this great Babylon of excitement and changingtastes. You will return after three or four years with aRussian princess for a bride, and no one will think more ofwhat occurred yesterday than if it had happened sixteenyears ago."

　　"Thank you, my dear Beauchamp, thank you for the excellentfeeling which prompts your advice; but it cannot be. I havetold you my wish, or rather my determination. You understandthat, interested as I am in this affair, I cannot see it inthe same light as you do. What appears to you to emanatefrom a celestial source, seems to me to proceed from one farless pure. Providence appears to me to have no share in thisaffair; and happily so, for instead of the invisible,impalpable agent of celestial rewards and punishments, Ishall find one both palpable and visible, on whom I shallrevenge myself, I assure you, for all I have suffered duringthe last month. Now, I repeat, Beauchamp, I wish to returnto human and material existence, and if you are still thefriend you profess to be, help me to discover the hand thatstruck the blow."

　　"Be it so," said Beauchamp; "if you must have me descend toearth, I submit; and if you will seek your enemy, I willassist you, and I will engage to find him, my honor beingalmost as deeply interested as yours."

　　"Well, then, you understand, Beauchamp, that we begin oursearch immediately. Each moment's delay is an eternity forme. The calumniator is not yet punished, and he may hopethat he will not be; but, on my honor, it he thinks so, hedeceives himself."

　　"Well, listen, Morcerf."

　　"Ah, Beauchamp, I see you know something already; you willrestore me to life."

　　"I do not say there is any truth in what I am going to tellyou, but it is, at least, a ray of light in a dark night; byfollowing it we may, perhaps, discover something morecertain."

　　"Tell me; satisfy my impatience."

　　"Well, I will tell you what I did not like to mention on myreturn from Yanina."

　　"Say on."

　　"I went, of course, to the chief banker of the town to makeinquiries. At the first word, before I had even mentionedyour father's name" --

　　"`Ah,' said he. `I guess what brings you here.'

　　"`How, and why?'

　　"`Because a fortnight since I was questioned on the samesubject.'

　　"`By whom?' -- `By a Paris banker, my correspondent.'

　　"`Whose name is' --

　　"`Danglars.'"

　　"He!" cried Albert; "yes, it is indeed he who has so longpursued my father with jealous hatred. He, the man who wouldbe popular, cannot forgive the Count of Morcerf for beingcreated a peer; and this marriage broken off without areason being assigned -- yes, it is all from the samecause."

　　"Make inquiries, Albert, but do not be angry without reason;make inquiries, and if it be true" --

　　"Oh, yes, if it be true," cried the young man, "he shall payme all I have suffered."

　　"Beware, Morcerf, he is already an old man."

　　"I will respect his age as he has respected the honor of myfamily; if my father had offended him, why did he not attackhim personally? Oh, no, he was afraid to encounter him faceto face."

　　"I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you. Actprudently."

　　"Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me. Beauchamp,solemn transactions should be sanctioned by a witness.Before this day closes, if M. Danglars is guilty, he shallcease to live, or I shall die. Pardieu, Beauchamp, mineshall be a splendid funeral!"

　　"When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should bepromptly executed. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let usgo immediately." They sent for a cabriolet. On entering thebanker's mansion, they perceived the phaeton and servant ofM. Andrea Cavalcanti. "Ah, parbleu, that's good," saidAlbert, with a gloomy tone. "If M. Danglars will not fightwith me, I will kill his son-in-law; Cavalcanti willcertainly fight." The servant announced the young man; butthe banker, recollecting what had transpired the day before,did not wish him admitted. It was, however, too late; Alberthad followed the footman, and, hearing the order given,forced the door open, and followed by Beauchamp foundhimself in the banker's study. "Sir," cried the latter, "amI no longer at liberty to receive whom I choose in my house?You appear to forget yourself sadly."

　　"No, sir," said Albert, coldly; "there are circumstances inwhich one cannot, except through cowardice, -- I offer youthat refuge, -- refuse to admit certain persons at least."

　　"What is your errand, then, with me, sir?"

　　"I mean," said Albert, drawing near, and without apparentlynoticing Cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards thefireplace -- "I mean to propose a meeting in some retiredcorner where no one will interrupt us for ten minutes; thatwill be sufficient -- where two men having met, one of themwill remain on the ground." Danglars turned pale; Cavalcantimoved a step forward, and Albert turned towards him. "Andyou, too," said he, "come, if you like, monsieur; you have aclaim, being almost one of the family, and I will give asmany rendezvous of that kind as I can find persons willingto accept them." Cavalcanti looked at Danglars with astupefied air, and the latter, making an effort, arose andstepped between the two young men. Albert's attack on Andreahad placed him on a different footing, and he hoped thisvisit had another cause than that he had at first supposed.

　　"Indeed, sir," said he to Albert, "if you are come toquarrel with this gentleman because I have preferred him toyou, I shall resign the case to the king's attorney."

　　"You mistake, sir," said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; "I amnot referring in the least to matrimony, and I onlyaddressed myself to M. Cavalcanti because he appeareddisposed to interfere between us. In one respect you areright, for I am ready to quarrel with every one to-day; butyou have the first claim, M. Danglars."

　　"Sir," replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, "I warnyou, when I have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, Ikill it; and far from thinking myself guilty of a crime, Ibelieve I do society a kindness. Now, if you are mad and tryto bite me, I will kill you without pity. Is it my faultthat your father has dishonored himself?"

　　"Yes, miserable wretch!" cried Morcerf, "it is your fault."Danglars retreated a few steps. "My fault?" said he; "youmust be mad! What do I know of the Grecian affair? Have Itravelled in that country? Did I advise your father to sellthe castle of Yanina -- to betray" --

　　"Silence!" said Albert, with a thundering voice. "No; it isnot you who have directly made this exposure and broughtthis sorrow on us, but you hypocritically provoked it."

　　"I?"

　　"Yes; you! How came it known?"

　　"I suppose you read it in the paper in the account fromYanina?"

　　"Who wrote to Yanina?"

　　"To Yanina?"

　　"Yes. Who wrote for particulars concerning my father?"

　　"I imagine any one may write to Yanina."

　　"But one person only wrote!"

　　"One only?"

　　"Yes; and that was you!"

　　"I, doubtless, wrote. It appears to me that when about tomarry your daughter to a young man, it is right to make someinquiries respecting his family; it is not only a right, buta duty."

　　"You wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive."

　　"I, indeed? I assure you," cried Danglars, with a confidenceand security proceeding less from fear than from theinterest he really felt for the young man, "I solemnlydeclare to you, that I should never have thought of writingto Yanina, did I know anything of Ali Pasha's misfortunes."

　　"Who, then, urged you to write? Tell me."

　　"Pardieu, it was the most simple thing in the world. I wasspeaking of your father's past history. I said the origin ofhis fortune remained obscure. The person to whom I addressedmy scruples asked me where your father had acquired hisproperty? I answered, `In Greece.' -- `Then,' said he,`write to Yanina.'"

　　"And who thus advised you?"

　　"No other than your friend, Monte Cristo."

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?"

　　"Yes; and I wrote, and will show you my correspondence, ifyou like." Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other. "Sir,"said Beauchamp, who had not yet spoken, "you appear toaccuse the count, who is absent from Paris at this moment,and cannot justify himself."

　　"I accuse no one, sir," said Danglars; "I relate, and I willrepeat before the count what I have said to you."

　　"Does the count know what answer you received?"

　　"Yes; I showed it to him."

　　"Did he know my father's Christian name was Fernand, and hisfamily name Mondego?"

　　"Yes, I had told him that long since, and I did only whatany other would have done in my circumstances, and perhapsless. When, the day after the arrival of this answer, yourfather came by the advice of Monte Cristo to ask mydaughter's hand for you, I decidedly refused him, butwithout any explanation or exposure. In short, why should Ihave any more to do with the affair? How did the honor ordisgrace of M. de Morcerf affect me? It neither increasednor decreased my income."

　　Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was nodoubt upon the subject. Danglars defended himself with thebaseness, but at the same time with the assurance, of a manwho speaks the truth, at least in part, if not wholly -- notfor conscience' sake, but through fear. Besides, what wasMorcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte Cristowas more or less guilty; it was a man who would answer forthe offence, whether trifling or serious; it was a man whowould fight, and it was evident Danglars's would not fight.And, in addition to this, everything forgotten orunperceived before presented itself now to his recollection.Monte Cristo knew everything, as he had bought the daughterof Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he had advisedDanglars to write to Yanina. The answer known, he hadyielded to Albert's wish to be introduced to Haidee, andallowed the conversation to turn on the death of Ali, andhad not opposed Haidee's recital (but having, doubtless,warned the young girl, in the few Romaic words he spoke toher, not to implicate Morcerf's father). Besides, had he notbegged of Morcerf not to mention his father's name beforeHaidee? Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandy when he knewthe final blow was near. There could be no doubt that allhad been calculated and previously arranged; Monte Cristothen was in league with his father's enemies. Albert tookBeauchamp aside, and communicated these ideas to him.

　　"You are right," said the latter; "M. Danglars has only beena secondary agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. deMonte Cristo that you must demand an explanation." Albertturned. "Sir," said he to Danglars, "understand that I donot take a final leave of you; I must ascertain if yourinsinuations are just, and am going now to inquire of theCount of Monte Cristo." He bowed to the banker, and went outwith Beauchamp, without appearing to notice Cavalcanti.Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he again assuredAlbert that no motive of personal hatred had influenced himagainst the Count of Morcerf.

　　Chapter 88The Insult.

　　At the banker's door Beauchamp stopped Morcerf. "Listen,"said he; "just now I told you it was of M. de Monte Cristoyou must demand an explanation."

　　"Yes; and we are going to his house."

　　"Reflect, Morcerf, one moment before you go."

　　"On what shall I reflect?"

　　"On the importance of the step you are taking."

　　"Is it more serious than going to M. Danglars?"

　　"Yes; M. Danglars is a money-lover, and those who lovemoney, you know, think too much of what they risk to beeasily induced to fight a duel. The other is, on thecontrary, to all appearance a true nobleman; but do you notfear to find him a bully?"

　　"I only fear one thing; namely, to find a man who will notfight."

　　"Do not be alarmed," said Beauchamp; "he will meet you. Myonly fear is that he will be too strong for you."

　　"My friend," said Morcerf, with a sweet smile, "that is whatI wish. The happiest thing that could occur to me, would beto die in my father's stead; that would save us all."

　　"Your mother would die of grief."

　　"My poor mother!" said Albert, passing his hand across hiseyes, "I know she would; but better so than die of shame."

　　"Are you quite decided, Albert?"

　　"Yes; let us go."

　　"But do you think we shall find the count at home?"

　　"He intended returning some hours after me, and doubtless heis now at home." They ordered the driver to take them to No.30 Champs-Elysees. Beauchamp wished to go in alone, butAlbert observed that as this was an unusual circumstance hemight be allowed to deviate from the usual etiquette inaffairs of honor. The cause which the young man espoused wasone so sacred that Beauchamp had only to comply with all hiswishes; he yielded and contented himself with followingMorcerf. Albert sprang from the porter's lodge to the steps.He was received by Baptistin. The count had, indeed, justarrived, but he was in his bath, and had forbidden that anyone should be admitted. "But after his bath?" asked Morcerf.

　　"My master will go to dinner."

　　"And after dinner?"

　　"He will sleep an hour."

　　"Then?"

　　"He is going to the opera."

　　"Are you sure of it?" asked Albert.

　　"Quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eighto'clock precisely."

　　"Very good," replied Albert; "that is all I wished to know."Then, turning towards Beauchamp, "If you have anything toattend to, Beauchamp, do it directly; if you have anyappointment for this evening, defer it till tomorrow. Idepend on you to accompany me to the opera; and if you can,bring Chateau-Renaud with you."

　　Beauchamp availed himself of Albert's permission, and lefthim, promising to call for him at a quarter before eight. Onhis return home, Albert expressed his wish to Franz Debray,and Morrel, to see them at the opera that evening. Then hewent to see his mother, who since the events of the daybefore had refused to see any one, and had kept her room. Hefound her in bed, overwhelmed with grief at this publichumiliation. The sight of Albert produced the effect whichmight naturally be expected on Mercedes; she pressed herson's hand and sobbed aloud, but her tears relieved her.Albert stood one moment speechless by the side of hismother's bed. It was evident from his pale face and knitbrows that his resolution to revenge himself was growingweaker. "My dear mother," said he, "do you know if M. deMorcerf has any enemy?" Mercedes started; she noticed thatthe young man did not say "my father." "My son," she said,"persons in the count's situation have many secret enemies.Those who are known are not the most dangerous."

　　"I know it, and appeal to your penetration. You are of sosuperior a mind, nothing escapes you."

　　"Why do you say so?"

　　"Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of theball we gave, that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing inour house." Mercedes raised herself on her feverish arm. "M.de Monte Cristo!" she exclaimed; "and how is he connectedwith the question you asked me?"

　　"You know, mother, M. de Monte Cristo is almost an Oriental,and it is customary with the Orientals to secure fullliberty for revenge by not eating or drinking in the housesof their enemies."

　　"Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?" repliedMercedes, becoming paler than the sheet which covered her."Who told you so? Why, you are mad, Albert! M. de MonteCristo has only shown us kindness. M. de Monte Cristo savedyour life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh, I entreatyou, my son, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it;and my counsel to you -- nay, my prayer -- is to retain hisfriendship."

　　"Mother," replied the young man, "you have especial reasonsfor telling me to conciliate that man."

　　"I?" said Mercedes, blushing as rapidly as she had turnedpale, and again becoming paler than ever.

　　"Yes, doubtless; and is it not that he may never do us anyharm?" Mercedes shuddered, and, fixing on her son ascrutinizing gaze, "You speak strangely," said she toAlbert, "and you appear to have some singular prejudices.What has the count done? Three days since you were with himin Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as ourbest friend."

　　An ironical smile passed over Albert's lips. Mercedes saw itand with the double instinct of woman and mother guessedall; but as she was prudent and strong-minded she concealedboth her sorrows and her fears. Albert was silent; aninstant after, the countess resumed: "You came to inquireafter my health; I will candidly acknowledge that I am notwell. You should install yourself here, and cheer mysolitude. I do not wish to be left alone."

　　"Mother," said the young man, "you know how gladly I wouldobey your wish, but an urgent and important affair obligesme to leave you for the whole evening."

　　"Well," replied Mercedes, sighing, "go, Albert; I will notmake you a slave to your filial piety." Albert pretended hedid not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her. Scarcelyhad he shut her door, when Mercedes called a confidentialservant, and ordered him to follow Albert wherever he shouldgo that evening, and to come and tell her immediately whathe observed. Then she rang for her lady's maid, and, weak asshe was, she dressed, in order to be ready for whatevermight happen. The footman's mission was an easy one. Albertwent to his room, and dressed with unusual care. At tenminutes to eight Beauchamp arrived; he had seenChateau-Renaud, who had promised to be in the orchestrabefore the curtain was raised. Both got into Albert's coupe;and, as the young man had no reason to conceal where he wasgoing, he called aloud, "To the opera." In his impatience hearrived before the beginning of the performance.

　　Chateau-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of thecircumstances, he required no explanation from Albert. Theconduct of the son in seeking to avenge his father was sonatural that Chateau-Renaud did not seek to dissuade him,and was content with renewing his assurances of devotion.Debray was not yet come, but Albert knew that he seldom losta scene at the opera. Albert wandered about the theatreuntil the curtain was drawn up. He hoped to meet with M. deMonte Cristo either in the lobby or on the stairs. The bellsummoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra withChateau-Renaud and Beauchamp. But his eyes scarcely quittedthe box between the columns, which remained obstinatelyclosed during the whole of the first act. At last, as Albertwas looking at his watch for about the hundredth time, atthe beginning of the second act the door opened, and MonteCristo entered, dressed in black, and, leaning over thefront of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followedhim, and looked also for his sister and brother in-law; hesoon discovered them in another box, and kissed his hand tothem.

　　The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale faceand threatening eyes, which evidently sought to gain hisattention. He recognized Albert, but thought it better notto notice him, as he looked so angry and discomposed.Without communicating his thoughts to his companion, he satdown, drew out his opera-glass, and looked another way.Although apparently not noticing Albert, he did not,however, lose sight of him, and when the curtain fell at theend of the second act, he saw him leave the orchestra withhis two friends. Then his head was seen passing at the backof the boxes, and the count knew that the approaching stormwas intended to fall on him. He was at the moment conversingcheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for whatmight happen. The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turninground, saw Albert, pale and trembling, followed by Beauchampand Chateau-Renaud.

　　"Well," cried he, with that benevolent politeness whichdistinguished his salutation from the common civilities ofthe world, "my cavalier has attained his object.Good-evening, M. de Morcerf." The countenance of this man,who possessed such extraordinary control over his feelings,expressed the most perfect cordiality. Morrel only thenrecollected the letter he had received from the viscount, inwhich, without assigning any reason, he begged him to go tothe opera, but he understood that something terrible wasbrooding.

　　"We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocriticalexpressions of politeness, or false professions offriendship," said Albert, "but to demand an explanation."The young man's trembling voice was scarcely audible. "Anexplanation at the opera?" said the count, with that calmtone and penetrating eye which characterize the man whoknows his cause is good. "Little acquainted as I am with thehabits of Parisians, I should not have thought this theplace for such a demand."

　　"Still, if people will shut themselves up," said Albert,"and cannot be seen because they are bathing, dining, orasleep, we must avail ourselves of the opportunity wheneverthey are to be seen."

　　"I am not difficult of access, sir; for yesterday, if mymemory does not deceive me, you were at my house."

　　"Yesterday I was at your house, sir," said the young man;"because then I knew not who you were." In pronouncing thesewords Albert had raised his voice so as to be heard by thosein the adjoining boxes and in the lobby. Thus the attentionof many was attracted by this altercation. "Where are youcome from, sir? You do not appear to be in the possession ofyour senses."

　　"Provided I understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed inmaking you understand that I will be revenged, I shall bereasonable enough," said Albert furiously.

　　"I do not understand you, sir," replied Monte Cristo; "andif I did, your tone is too high. I am at home here, and Ialone have a right to raise my voice above another's. Leavethe box, sir!" Monte Cristo pointed towards the door withthe most commanding dignity. "Ah, I shall know how to makeyou leave your home!" replied Albert, clasping in hisconvulsed grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not losesight of.

　　"Well, well," said Monte Cristo quietly, "I see you wish toquarrel with me; but I would give you one piece of advice,which you will do well to keep in mind. It is in poor tasteto make a display of a challenge. Display is not becoming toevery one, M. de Morcerf."

　　At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around thegroup of spectators of this scene. They had talked of no onebut Morcerf the whole day. Albert understood the allusion ina moment, and was about to throw his glove at the count,when Morrel seized his hand, while Beauchamp andChateau-Renaud, fearing the scene would surpass the limitsof a challenge, held him back. But Monte Cristo, withoutrising, and leaning forward in his chair, merely stretchedout his arm and, taking the damp, crushed glove from theclinched hand of the young man, "Sir," said he in a solemntone, "I consider your glove thrown, and will return it toyou wrapped around a bullet. Now leave me or I will summonmy servants to throw you out at the door."

　　Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albertstepped back, and Morrel closed the door. Monte Cristo tookup his glass again as if nothing had happened; his face waslike marble, and his heart was like bronze. Morrelwhispered, "What have you done to him?"

　　"I? Nothing -- at least personally," said Monte Cristo.

　　"But there must be some cause for this strange scene."

　　"The Count of Morcerf's adventure exasperates the youngman."

　　"Have you anything to do with it?"

　　"It was through Haidee that the Chamber was informed of hisfather's treason."

　　"Indeed?" said Morrel. "I had been told, but would notcredit it, that the Grecian slave I have seen with you herein this very box was the daughter of Ali Pasha."

　　"It is true, nevertheless."

　　"Then," said Morrel, "I understand it all, and this scenewas premeditated."

　　"How so?"

　　"Yes. Albert wrote to request me to come to the opera,doubtless that I might be a witness to the insult he meantto offer you."

　　"Probably," said Monte Cristo with his imperturbabletranquillity.

　　"But what shall you do with him?"

　　"With whom?"

　　"With Albert."

　　"What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as Inow press your hand, I shall kill him before ten o'clockto-morrow morning." Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo'shand in both of his, and he shuddered to feel how cold andsteady it was.

　　"Ah, Count," said he, "his father loves him so much!"

　　"Do not speak to me of that," said Monte Cristo, with thefirst movement of anger he had betrayed; "I will make himsuffer." Morrel, amazed, let fall Monte Cristo's hand."Count, count!" said he.

　　"Dear Maximilian," interrupted the count, "listen howadorably Duprez is singing that line, --

　　`O Mathilde! idole de mon ame!'

　　"I was the first to discover Duprez at Naples, and the firstto applaud him. Bravo, bravo!" Morrel saw it was useless tosay more, and refrained. The curtain, which had risen at theclose of the scene with Albert, again fell, and a rap washeard at the door.

　　"Come in," said Monte Cristo with a voice that betrayed notthe least emotion; and immediately Beauchamp appeared."Good-evening, M. Beauchamp," said Monte Cristo, as if thiswas the first time he had seen the journalist that evening;"be seated."

　　Beauchamp bowed, and, sitting down, "Sir," said he, "I justnow accompanied M. de Morcerf, as you saw."

　　"And that means," replied Monte Cristo, laughing, "that youhad, probably, just dined together. I am happy to see, M.Beauchamp, that you are more sober than he was."

　　"Sir," said M. Beauchamp, "Albert was wrong, I acknowledge,to betray so much anger, and I come, on my own account, toapologize for him. And having done so, entirely on my ownaccount, be it understood, I would add that I believe youtoo gentlemanly to refuse giving him some explanationconcerning your connection with Yanina. Then I will add twowords about the young Greek girl." Monte Cristo motioned himto be silent. "Come," said he, laughing, "there are all myhopes about to be destroyed."

　　"How so?" asked Beauchamp.

　　"Doubtless you wish to make me appear a very eccentriccharacter. I am, in your opinion, a Lara, a Manfred, a LordRuthven; then, just as I am arriving at the climax, youdefeat your own end, and seek to make an ordinary man of me.You bring me down to your own level, and demandexplanations! Indeed, M. Beauchamp, it is quite laughable."

　　"Yet," replied Beauchamp haughtily, "there are occasionswhen probity commands" --

　　"M. Beauchamp," interposed this strange man, "the Count ofMonte Cristo bows to none but the Count of Monte Cristohimself. Say no more, I entreat you. I do what I please, M.Beauchamp, and it is always well done."

　　"Sir," replied the young man, "honest men are not to be paidwith such coin. I require honorable guaranties."

　　"I am, sir, a living guaranty," replied Monte Cristo,motionless, but with a threatening look; "we have both bloodin our veins which we wish to shed -- that is our mutualguaranty. Tell the viscount so, and that to-morrow, beforeten o'clock, I shall see what color his is."

　　"Then I have only to make arrangements for the duel," saidBeauchamp.

　　"It is quite immaterial to me," said Monte Cristo, "and itwas very unnecessary to disturb me at the opera for such atrifle. In France people fight with the sword or pistol, inthe colonies with the carbine, in Arabia with the dagger.Tell your client that, although I am the insulted party, inorder to carry out my eccentricity, I leave him the choiceof arms, and will accept without discussion, withoutdispute, anything, even combat by drawing lots, which isalways stupid, but with me different from other people, as Iam sure to gain."

　　"Sure to gain!" repeated Beauchamp, looking with amazementat the count.

　　"Certainly," said Monte Cristo, slightly shrugging hisshoulders; "otherwise I would not fight with M. de Morcerf.I shall kill him -- I cannot help it. Only by a single linethis evening at my house let me know the arms and the hour;I do not like to be kept waiting."

　　"Pistols, then, at eight o'clock, in the Bois de Vincennes,"said Beauchamp, quite disconcerted, not knowing if he wasdealing with an arrogant braggadocio or a supernaturalbeing.

　　"Very well, sir," said Monte Cristo. "Now all that issettled, do let me see the performance, and tell your friendAlbert not to come any more this evening; he will hurthimself with all his ill-chosen barbarisms: let him go homeand go to sleep." Beauchamp left the box, perfectly amazed."Now," said Monte Cristo, turning towards Morrel, "I maydepend upon you, may I not?"

　　"Certainly," said Morrel, "I am at your service, count;still" --

　　"What?"

　　"It is desirable I should know the real cause."

　　"That is to say, you would rather not?"

　　"No."

　　"The young man himself is acting blindfolded, and knows notthe true cause, which is known only to God and to me; but Igive you my word, Morrel, that God, who does know it, willbe on our side."

　　"Enough," said Morrel; "who is your second witness?"

　　"I know no one in Paris, Morrel, on whom I could confer thathonor besides you and your brother Emmanuel. Do you thinkEmmanuel would oblige me?"

　　"I will answer for him, count."

　　"Well? that is all I require. To-morrow morning, at seveno'clock, you will be with me, will you not?"

　　"We will."

　　"Hush, the curtain is rising. Listen! I never lose a note ofthis opera if I can avoid it; the music of William Tell isso sweet."

　　Chapter 89A Nocturnal Interview.

　　Monte Cristo waited, according to his usual custom, untilDuprez had sung his famous "Suivez-moi;" then he rose andwent out. Morrel took leave of him at the door, renewing hispromise to be with him the next morning at seven o'clock,and to bring Emmanuel. Then he stepped into his coupe, calmand smiling, and was at home in five minutes. No one whoknew the count could mistake his expression when, onentering, he said, "Ali, bring me my pistols with the ivorycross."

　　Ali brought the box to his master, who examined the weaponswith a solicitude very natural to a man who is about tointrust his life to a little powder and shot. These werepistols of an especial pattern, which Monte Cristo had hadmade for target practice in his own room. A cap wassufficient to drive out the bullet, and from the adjoiningroom no one would have suspected that the count was, assportsmen would say, keeping his hand in. He was just takingone up and looking for the point to aim at on a little ironplate which served him as a target, when his study dooropened, and Baptistin entered. Before he had spoken a word,the count saw in the next room a veiled woman, who hadfollowed closely after Baptistin, and now, seeing the countwith a pistol in his hand and swords on the table, rushedin. Baptistin looked at his master, who made a sign to him,and he went out, closing the door after him. "Who are you,madame?" said the count to the veiled woman.

　　The stranger cast one look around her, to be certain thatthey were quite alone; then bending as if she would haveknelt, and joining her hands, she said with an accent ofdespair, "Edmond, you will not kill my son?" The countretreated a step, uttered a slight exclamation, and let fallthe pistol he held. "What name did you pronounce then,Madame de Morcerf?" said he. "Yours!" cried she, throwingback her veil, -- "yours, which I alone, perhaps, have notforgotten. Edmond, it is not Madame de Morcerf who is cometo you, it is Mercedes."

　　"Mercedes is dead, madame," said Monte Cristo; "I know noone now of that name."

　　"Mercedes lives, sir, and she remembers, for she alonerecognized you when she saw you, and even before she sawyou, by your voice, Edmond, -- by the simple sound of yourvoice; and from that moment she has followed your steps,watched you, feared you, and she needs not to inquire whathand has dealt the blow which now strikes M. de Morcerf."

　　"Fernand, do you mean?" replied Monte Cristo, with bitterirony; "since we are recalling names, let us remember themall." Monte Cristo had pronounced the name of Fernand withsuch an expression of hatred that Mercedes felt a thrill ofhorror run through every vein. "You see, Edmond, I am notmistaken, and have cause to say, `Spare my son!'"

　　"And who told you, madame, that I have any hostileintentions against your son?"

　　"No one, in truth; but a mother has twofold sight. I guessedall; I followed him this evening to the opera, and,concealed in a parquet box, have seen all."

　　"If you have seen all, madame, you know that the son ofFernand has publicly insulted me," said Monte Cristo withawful calmness.

　　"Oh, for pity's sake!"

　　"You have seen that he would have thrown his glove in myface if Morrel, one of my friends, had not stopped him."

　　"Listen to me, my son has also guessed who you are, -- heattributes his father's misfortunes to you."

　　"Madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes, -- itis a punishment. It is not I who strike M. de Morcerf; it isprovidence which punishes him."

　　"And why do you represent providence?" cried Mercedes. "Whydo you remember when it forgets? What are Yanina and itsvizier to you, Edmond? What injury his Fernand Mondego doneyou in betraying Ali Tepelini?"

　　"Ah, madame," replied Monte Cristo, "all this is an affairbetween the French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki. Itdoes not concern me, you are right; and if I have sworn torevenge myself, it is not on the French captain, or theCount of Morcerf, but on the fisherman Fernand, the husbandof Mercedes the Catalane."

　　"Ah, sir!" cried the countess, "how terrible a vengeance fora fault which fatality made me commit! -- for I am the onlyculprit, Edmond, and if you owe revenge to any one, it is tome, who had not fortitude to bear your absence and mysolitude."

　　"But," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "why was I absent? And whywere you alone?"

　　"Because you had been arrested, Edmond, and were aprisoner."

　　"And why was I arrested? Why was I a prisoner?"

　　"I do not know," said Mercedes. "You do not, madame; atleast, I hope not. But I will tell you. I was arrested andbecame a prisoner because, under the arbor of La Reserve,the day before I was to marry you, a man named Danglarswrote this letter, which the fisherman Fernand himselfposted." Monte Cristo went to a secretary, opened a drawerby a spring, from which he took a paper which had lost itsoriginal color, and the ink of which had become of a rustyhue -- this he placed in the hands of Mercedes. It wasDanglars' letter to the king's attorney, which the Count ofMonte Cristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson& French, had taken from the file against Edmond Dantes, onthe day he had paid the two hundred thousand francs to M. deBoville. Mercedes read with terror the following lines: --

　　"The king's attorney is informed by a friend to the throneand religion that one Edmond Dantes, second in command onboard the Pharaon, this day arrived from Smyrna, afterhaving touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, is the bearer ofa letter from Murat to the usurper, and of another letterfrom the usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris. Amplecorroboration of this statement may be obtained by arrestingthe above-mentioned Edmond Dantes, who either carries theletter for Paris about with him, or has it at his father'sabode. Should it not be found in possession of either fatheror son, then it will assuredly be discovered in the cabinbelonging to the said Dantes on board the Pharaon."

　　"How dreadful!" said Mercedes, passing her hand across herbrow, moist with perspiration; "and that letter" --

　　"I bought it for two hundred thousand francs, madame," saidMonte Cristo; "but that is a trifle, since it enables me tojustify myself to you."

　　"And the result of that letter" --

　　"You well know, madame, was my arrest; but you do not knowhow long that arrest lasted. You do not know that I remainedfor fourteen years within a quarter of a league of you, in adungeon in the Chateau d'If. You do not know that every dayof those fourteen years I renewed the vow of vengeance whichI had made the first day; and yet I was not aware that youhad married Fernand, my calumniator, and that my father haddied of hunger!"

　　"Can it be?" cried Mercedes, shuddering.

　　"That is what I heard on leaving my prison fourteen yearsafter I had entered it; and that is why, on account of theliving Mercedes and my deceased father, I have sworn torevenge myself on Fernand, and -- I have revenged myself."

　　"And you are sure the unhappy Fernand did that?"

　　"I am satisfied, madame, that he did what I have told you;besides, that is not much more odious than that a Frenchmanby adoption should pass over to the English; that a Spaniardby birth should have fought against the Spaniards; that astipendiary of Ali should have betrayed and murdered Ali.Compared with such things, what is the letter you have justread? -- a lover's deception, which the woman who hasmarried that man ought certainly to forgive; but not so thelover who was to have married her. Well, the French did notavenge themselves on the traitor, the Spaniards did notshoot the traitor, Ali in his tomb left the traitorunpunished; but I, betrayed, sacrificed, buried, have risenfrom my tomb, by the grace of God, to punish that man. Hesends me for that purpose, and here I am." The poor woman'shead and arms fell; her legs bent under her, and she fell onher knees. "Forgive, Edmond, forgive for my sake, who loveyou still!"

　　The dignity of the wife checked the fervor of the lover andthe mother. Her forehead almost touched the carpet, when thecount sprang forward and raised her. Then seated on a chair,she looked at the manly countenance of Monte Cristo, onwhich grief and hatred still impressed a threateningexpression. "Not crush that accursed race?" murmured he;"abandon my purpose at the moment of its accomplishment?Impossible, madame, impossible!"

　　"Edmond," said the poor mother, who tried every means, "whenI call you Edmond, why do you not call me Mercedes?"

　　"Mercedes!" repeated Monte Cristo; "Mercedes! Well yes, youare right; that name has still its charms, and this is thefirst time for a long period that I have pronounced it sodistinctly. Oh, Mercedes, I have uttered your name with thesigh of melancholy, with the groan of sorrow, with the lasteffort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen with cold,crouched on the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it,consumed with heat, rolling on the stone floor of my prison.Mercedes, I must revenge myself, for I suffered fourteenyears, -- fourteen years I wept, I cursed; now I tell you,Mercedes, I must revenge myself."

　　The count, fearing to yield to the entreaties of her he hadso ardently loved, called his sufferings to the assistanceof his hatred. "Revenge yourself, then, Edmond," cried thepoor mother; "but let your vengeance fall on the culprits,-- on him, on me, but not on my son!"

　　"It is written in the good book," said Monte Cristo, "thatthe sins of the fathers shall fall upon their children tothe third and fourth generation. Since God himself dictatedthose words to his prophet, why should I seek to make myselfbetter than God?"

　　"Edmond," continued Mercedes, with her arms extended towardsthe count, "since I first knew you, I have adored your name,have respected your memory. Edmond, my friend, do not compelme to tarnish that noble and pure image reflectedincessantly on the mirror of my heart. Edmond, if you knewall the prayers I have addressed to God for you while Ithought you were living and since I have thought you must bedead! Yes, dead, alas! I imagined your dead body buried atthe foot of some gloomy tower, or cast to the bottom of apit by hateful jailers, and I wept! What could I do for you,Edmond, besides pray and weep? Listen; for ten years Idreamed each night the same dream. I had been told that youhad endeavored to escape; that you had taken the place ofanother prisoner; that you had slipped into the windingsheet of a dead body; that you had been thrown alive fromthe top of the Chateau d'If, and that the cry you uttered asyou dashed upon the rocks first revealed to your jailersthat they were your murderers. Well, Edmond, I swear to you,by the head of that son for whom I entreat your pity, --Edmond, for ten years I saw every night every detail of thatfrightful tragedy, and for ten years I heard every night thecry which awoke me, shuddering and cold. And I, too, Edmond-- oh! believe me -- guilty as I was -- oh, yes, I, too,have suffered much!"

　　"Have you known what it is to have your father starve todeath in your absence?" cried Monte Cristo, thrusting hishands into his hair; "have you seen the woman you lovedgiving her hand to your rival, while you were perishing atthe bottom of a dungeon?"

　　"No," interrupted Mercedes, "but I have seen him whom Iloved on the point of murdering my son." Mercedes utteredthese words with such deep anguish, with an accent of suchintense despair, that Monte Cristo could not restrain a sob.The lion was daunted; the avenger was conquered. "What doyou ask of me?" said he, -- "your son's life? Well, he shalllive!" Mercedes uttered a cry which made the tears startfrom Monte Cristo's eyes; but these tears disappeared almostinstantaneously, for, doubtless, God had sent some angel tocollect them -- far more precious were they in his eyes thanthe richest pearls of Guzerat and Ophir.

　　"Oh," said she, seizing the count's hand and raising it toher lips; "oh, thank you, thank you, Edmond! Now you areexactly what I dreamt you were, -- the man I always loved.Oh, now I may say so!"

　　"So much the better," replied Monte Cristo; "as that poorEdmond will not have long to be loved by you. Death is aboutto return to the tomb, the phantom to retire in darkness."

　　"What do you say, Edmond?"

　　"I say, since you command me, Mercedes, I must die."

　　"Die? and why so? Who talks of dying? Whence have you theseideas of death?"

　　"You do not suppose that, publicly outraged in the face of awhole theatre, in the presence of your friends and those ofyour son -- challenged by a boy who will glory in myforgiveness as if it were a victory -- you do not supposethat I can for one moment wish to live. What I most lovedafter you, Mercedes, was myself, my dignity, and thatstrength which rendered me superior to other men; thatstrength was my life. With one word you have crushed it, andI die."

　　"But the duel will not take place, Edmond, since youforgive?"

　　"It will take place," said Monte Cristo, in a most solemntone; "but instead of your son's blood to stain the ground,mine will flow." Mercedes shrieked, and sprang towards MonteCristo, but, suddenly stopping, "Edmond," said she, "thereis a God above us, since you live and since I have seen youagain; I trust to him from my heart. While waiting hisassistance I trust to your word; you have said that my sonshould live, have you not?"

　　"Yes, madame, he shall live," said Monte Cristo, surprisedthat without more emotion Mercedes had accepted the heroicsacrifice he made for her. Mercedes extended her hand to thecount.

　　"Edmond," said she, and her eyes were wet with tears whilelooking at him to whom she spoke, "how noble it is of you,how great the action you have just performed, how sublime tohave taken pity on a poor woman who appealed to you withevery chance against her, Alas, I am grown old with griefmore than with years, and cannot now remind my Edmond by asmile, or by a look, of that Mercedes whom he once spent somany hours in contemplating. Ah, believe me, Edmond, as Itold you, I too have suffered much; I repeat, it ismelancholy to pass one's life without having one joy torecall, without preserving a single hope; but that provesthat all is not yet over. No, it is not finished; I feel itby what remains in my heart. Oh, I repeat it, Edmond; whatyou have just done is beautiful -- it is grand; it issublime."

　　"Do you say so now, Mercedes? -- then what would you say ifyou knew the extent of the sacrifice I make to you? Supposethat the Supreme Being, after having created the world andfertilized chaos, had paused in the work to spare an angelthe tears that might one day flow for mortal sins from herimmortal eyes; suppose that when everything was in readinessand the moment had come for God to look upon his work andsee that it was good -- suppose he had snuffed out the sunand tossed the world back into eternal night -- then -- eventhen, Mercedes, you could not imagine what I lose insacrificing my life at this moment." Mercedes looked at thecount in a way which expressed at the same time herastonishment, her admiration, and her gratitude. MonteCristo pressed his forehead on his burning hands, as if hisbrain could no longer bear alone the weight of its thoughts."Edmond," said Mercedes, "I have but one word more to say toyou." The count smiled bitterly. "Edmond," continued she,"you will see that if my face is pale, if my eyes are dull,if my beauty is gone; if Mercedes, in short, no longerresembles her former self in her features, you will see thather heart is still the same. Adieu, then, Edmond; I havenothing more to ask of heaven -- I have seen you again, andhave found you as noble and as great as formerly you were.Adieu, Edmond, adieu, and thank you."

　　But the count did not answer. Mercedes opened the door ofthe study and had disappeared before he had recovered fromthe painful and profound revery into which his thwartedvengeance had plunged him. The clock of the Invalides struckone when the carriage which conveyed Madame de Morcerf awayrolled on the pavement of the Champs-Elysees, and made MonteCristo raise his head. "What a fool I was," said he, "not totear my heart out on the day when I resolved to avengemyself!"

　　Chapter 90The Meeting.

　　After Mercedes had left Monte Cristo, he fell into profoundgloom. Around him and within him the flight of thoughtseemed to have stopped; his energetic mind slumbered, as thebody does after extreme fatigue. "What?" said he to himself,while the lamp and the wax lights were nearly burnt out, andthe servants were waiting impatiently in the anteroom;"what? this edifice which I have been so long preparing,which I have reared with so much care and toil, is to becrushed by a single touch, a word, a breath! Yes, this self,of whom I thought so much, of whom I was so proud, who hadappeared so worthless in the dungeons of the Chateau d'If,and whom I had succeeded in making so great, will be but alump of clay to-morrow. Alas, it is not the death of thebody I regret; for is not the destruction of the vitalprinciple, the repose to which everything is tending, towhich every unhappy being aspires, -- is not this the reposeof matter after which I so long sighed, and which I wasseeking to attain by the painful process of starvation whenFaria appeared in my dungeon? What is death for me? One stepfarther into rest, -- two, perhaps, into silence.

　　"No, it is not existence, then, that I regret, but the ruinof projects so slowly carried out, so laboriously framed.Providence is now opposed to them, when I most thought itwould be propitious. It is not God's will that they shouldbe accomplished. This burden, almost as heavy as a world,which I had raised, and I had thought to bear to the end,was too great for my strength, and I was compelled to lay itdown in the middle of my career. Oh, shall I then, againbecome a fatalist, whom fourteen years of despair and ten ofhope had rendered a believer in providence? And all this --all this, because my heart, which I thought dead, was onlysleeping; because it has awakened and has begun to beatagain, because I have yielded to the pain of the emotionexcited in my breast by a woman's voice. Yet," continued thecount, becoming each moment more absorbed in theanticipation of the dreadful sacrifice for the morrow, whichMercedes had accepted, "yet, it is impossible that sonoble-minded a woman should thus through selfishness consentto my death when I am in the prime of life and strength; itis impossible that she can carry to such a point maternallove, or rather delirium. There are virtues which becomecrimes by exaggeration. No, she must have conceived somepathetic scene; she will come and throw herself between us;and what would be sublime here will there appearridiculous." The blush of pride mounted to the count'sforehead as this thought passed through his mind."Ridiculous?" repeated he; "and the ridicule will fall onme. I ridiculous? No, I would rather die."

　　By thus exaggerating to his own mind the anticipatedill-fortune of the next day, to which he had condemnedhimself by promising Mercedes to spare her son, the count atlast exclaimed, "Folly, folly, folly! -- to carry generosityso far as to put myself up as a mark for that young man toaim at. He will never believe that my death was suicide; andyet it is important for the honor of my memory, -- and thissurely is not vanity, but a justifiable pride, -- it isimportant the world should know that I have consented, by myfree will, to stop my arm, already raised to strike, andthat with the arm which has been so powerful against othersI have struck myself. It must be; it shall be."

　　Seizing a pen, he drew a paper from a secret drawer in hisdesk, and wrote at the bottom of the document (which was noother than his will, made since his arrival in Paris) a sortof codicil, clearly explaining the nature of his death. "Ido this, O my God," said he, with his eyes raised to heaven,"as much for thy honor as for mine. I have during ten yearsconsidered myself the agent of thy vengeance, and otherwretches, like Morcerf, Danglars, Villefort, even Morcerfhimself, must not imagine that chance has freed them fromtheir enemy. Let them know, on the contrary, that theirpunishment, which had been decreed by providence, is onlydelayed by my present determination, and although theyescape it in this world, it awaits them in another, and thatthey are only exchanging time for eternity."

　　While he was thus agitated by gloomy uncertainties, --wretched waking dreams of grief, -- the first rays ofmorning pierced his windows, and shone upon the pale bluepaper on which he had just inscribed his justification ofprovidence. It was just five o'clock in the morning when aslight noise like a stifled sigh reached his ear. He turnedhis head, looked around him, and saw no one; but the soundwas repeated distinctly enough to convince him of itsreality.

　　He arose, and quietly opening the door of the drawing-room,saw Haidee, who had fallen on a chair, with her arms hangingdown and her beautiful head thrown back. She had beenstanding at the door, to prevent his going out withoutseeing her, until sleep, which the young cannot resist, hadoverpowered her frame, wearied as she was with watching. Thenoise of the door did not awaken her, and Monte Cristo gazedat her with affectionate regret. "She remembered that shehad a son," said he; "and I forgot I had a daughter." Then,shaking his head sorrowfully, "Poor Haidee," said he; "shewished to see me, to speak to me; she has feared or guessedsomething. Oh, I cannot go without taking leave of her; Icannot die without confiding her to some one." He quietlyregained his seat, and wrote under the other lines: --

　　"I bequeath to Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, -- andson of my former patron, Pierre Morrel, shipowner atMarseilles, -- the sum of twenty millions, a part of whichmay be offered to his sister Julia and brother-in-lawEmmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune maymar their happiness. These twenty millions are concealed inmy grotto at Monte Cristo, of which Bertuccio knows thesecret. If his heart is free, and he will marry Haidee, thedaughter of Ali Pasha of Yanina, whom I have brought up withthe love of a father, and who has shown the love andtenderness of a daughter for me, he will thus accomplish mylast wish. This will has already constituted Haidee heiressof the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds inEngland, Austria, and Holland, furniture in my differentpalaces and houses, and which without the twenty millionsand the legacies to my servants, may still amount to sixtymillions."

　　He was finishing the last line when a cry behind him madehim start, and the pen fell from his hand. "Haidee," saidhe. "did you read it?"

　　"Oh, my lord," said she, "why are you writing thus at suchan hour? Why are you bequeathing all your fortune to me? Areyou going to leave me?"

　　"I am going on a journey, dear child," said Monte Cristo,with an expression of infinite tenderness and melancholy;"and if any misfortune should happen to me"

　　The count stopped. "Well?" asked the young girl, with anauthoritative tone the count had never observed before, andwhich startled him. "Well, if any misfortune happen to me,"replied Monte Cristo, "I wish my daughter to be happy."Haidee smiled sorrowfully, and shook her head. "Do you thinkof dying, my lord?" said she.

　　"The wise man, my child, has said, `It is good to think ofdeath.'"

　　"Well, if you die," said she, "bequeath your fortune toothers, for if you die I shall require nothing;" and, takingthe paper, she tore it in four pieces, and threw it into themiddle of the room. Then, the effort having exhausted herstrength, she fell not asleep this time, but fainting on thefloor. The count leaned over her and raised her in his arms;and seeing that sweet pale face, those lovely eyes closed,that beautiful form motionless and to all appearancelifeless, the idea occurred to him for the first time, thatperhaps she loved him otherwise than as a daughter loves afather.

　　"Alas," murmured he, with intense suffering, "I might, then,have been happy yet." Then he carried Haidee to her room,resigned her to the care of her attendants, and returning tohis study, which he shut quickly this time, he again copiedthe destroyed will. As he was finishing, the sound of acabriolet entering the yard was heard. Monte Cristoapproached the window, and saw Maximilian and Emmanuelalight. "Good," said he; "it was time," -- and he sealed hiswill with three seals. A moment afterwards he heard a noisein the drawing-room, and went to open the door himself.Morrel was there; he had come twenty minutes before the timeappointed. "I am perhaps come too soon, count," said he,"but I frankly acknowledge that I have not closed my eyesall night, nor has any one in my house. I need to see youstrong in your courageous assurance, to recover myself."Monte Cristo could not resist this proof of affection; henot only extended his hand to the young man, but flew to himwith open arms. "Morrel," said he, "it is a happy day forme, to feel that I am beloved by such a man as you.Good-morning, Emmanuel; you will come with me then,Maximilian?"

　　"Did you doubt it?" said the young captain.

　　"But if I were wrong" --

　　"I watched you during the whole scene of that challengeyesterday; I have been thinking of your firmness all night,and I said to myself that justice must be on your side, orman's countenance is no longer to be relied on."

　　"But, Morrel, Albert is your friend?"

　　"Simply an acquaintance, sir."

　　"You met on the same day you first saw me?"

　　"Yes, that is true; but I should not have recollected it ifyou had not reminded me."

　　"Thank you, Morrel." Then ringing the bell once, "Look."said he to Ali, who came immediately, "take that to mysolicitor. It is my will, Morrel. When I am dead, you willgo and examine it."

　　"What?" said Morrel, "you dead?"

　　"Yes; must I not be prepared for everything, dear friend?But what did you do yesterday after you left me?"

　　"I went to Tortoni's, where, as I expected, I foundBeauchamp and Chateau-Renaud. I own I was seeking them."

　　"Why, when all was arranged?"

　　"Listen, count; the affair is serious and unavoidable."

　　"Did you doubt it!"

　　"No; the offence was public, and every one is alreadytalking of it."

　　"Well?"

　　"Well, I hoped to get an exchange of arms, -- to substitutethe sword for the pistol; the pistol is blind."

　　"Have you succeeded?" asked Monte Cristo quickly, with animperceptible gleam of hope.

　　"No; for your skill with the sword is so well known."

　　"Ah? -- who has betrayed me?"

　　"The skilful swordsman whom you have conquered."

　　"And you failed?"

　　"They positively refused."

　　"Morrel," said the count, "have you ever seen me fire apistol?"

　　"Never."

　　"Well, we have time; look." Monte Cristo took the pistols heheld in his hand when Mercedes entered, and fixing an ace ofclubs against the iron plate, with four shots hesuccessively shot off the four sides of the club. At eachshot Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with whichMonte Cristo performed this dexterous feat, and saw thatthey were no larger than buckshot. "It is astonishing," saidhe. "Look, Emmanuel." Then turning towards Monte Cristo,"Count," said he, "in the name of all that is dear to you, Ientreat you not to kill Albert! -- the unhappy youth has amother."

　　"You are right," said Monte Cristo; "and I have none." Thesewords were uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder. "Youare the offended party, count."

　　"Doubtless; what does that imply?"

　　"That you will fire first."

　　"I fire first?"

　　"Oh, I obtained, or rather claimed that; we had concededenough for them to yield us that."

　　"And at what distance?"

　　"Twenty paces." A smile of terrible import passed over thecount's lips. "Morrel," said he, "do not forget what youhave just seen."

　　"The only chance for Albert's safety, then, will arise fromyour emotion."

　　"I suffer from emotion?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"Or from your generosity, my friend; to so good a marksmanas you are, I may say what would appear absurd to another."

　　"What is that?"

　　"Break his arm -- wound him -- but do not kill him."

　　"I will tell you, Morrel," said the count, "that I do notneed entreating to spare the life of M. de Morcerf; he shallbe so well spared, that he will return quietly with his twofriends, while I" --

　　"And you?"

　　"That will be another thing; I shall be brought home."

　　"No, no," cried Maximilian, quite unable to restrain hisfeelings.

　　"As I told you, my dear Morrel, M. de Morcerf will kill me."Morrel looked at him in utter amazement. "But what hashappened, then, since last evening, count?"

　　"The same thing that happened to Brutus the night before thebattle of Philippi; I have seen a ghost."

　　"And that ghost" --

　　"Told me, Morrel, that I had lived long enough." Maximilianand Emmanuel looked at each other. Monte Cristo drew out hiswatch. "Let us go," said he; "it is five minutes past seven,and the appointment was for eight o'clock." A carriage wasin readiness at the door. Monte Cristo stepped into it withhis two friends. He had stopped a moment in the passage tolisten at a door, and Maximilian and Emmanuel, who hadconsiderately passed forward a few steps, thought they heardhim answer by a sigh to a sob from within. As the clockstruck eight they drove up to the place of meeting. "We arefirst," said Morrel, looking out of the window. "Excuse me,sir," said Baptistin, who had followed his master withindescribable terror, "but I think I see a carriage downthere under the trees."

　　Monte Cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offeredhis hand to assist Emmanuel and Maximilian. The latterretained the count's hand between his. "I like," said he,"to feel a hand like this, when its owner relies on thegoodness of his cause."

　　"It seems to me," said Emmanuel, "that I see two young mendown there, who are evidently, waiting." Monte Cristo drewMorrel a step or two behind his brother-in-law."Maximilian," said he, "are your affections disengaged?"Morrel looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment. "I do notseek your confidence, my dear friend. I only ask you asimple question; answer it; -- that is all I require."

　　"I love a young girl, count."

　　"Do you love her much?"

　　"More than my life."

　　"Another hope defeated!" said the count. Then, with a sigh,"Poor Haidee!" murmured he.

　　"To tell the truth, count, if I knew less of you, I shouldthink that you were less brave than you are."

　　"Because I sigh when thinking of some one I am leaving?Come, Morrel, it is not like a soldier to be so bad a judgeof courage. Do I regret life? What is it to me, who havepassed twenty years between life and death? Moreover, do notalarm yourself, Morrel; this weakness, if it is such, isbetrayed to you alone. I know the world is a drawing-room,from which we must retire politely and honestly; that is,with a bow, and our debts of honor paid."

　　"That is to the purpose. Have you brought your arms?"

　　"I? -- what for? I hope these gentlemen have theirs."

　　"I will inquire," said Morrel.

　　"Do; but make no treaty -- you understand me?"

　　"You need not fear." Morrel advanced towards Beauchamp andChateau-Renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to meet him.The three young men bowed to each other courteously, if notaffably.

　　"Excuse me, gentlemen," said Morrel, "but I do not see M. deMorcerf."

　　"He sent us word this morning," replied Chateau-Renaud,"that he would meet us on the ground."

　　"Ah," said Morrel. Beauchamp pulled out his watch. "It isonly five minutes past eight," said he to Morrel; "there isnot much time lost yet."

　　"Oh, I made no allusion of that kind," replied Morrel.

　　"There is a carriage coming," said Chateau-Renaud. Itadvanced rapidly along one of the avenues leading towardsthe open space where they were assembled. "You are doubtlessprovided with pistols, gentlemen? M. de Monte Cristo yieldshis right of using his."

　　"We had anticipated this kindness on the part of the count,"said Beauchamp, "and I have brought some weapons which Ibought eight or ten days since, thinking to want them on asimilar occasion. They are quite new, and have not yet beenused. Will you examine them."

　　"Oh, M. Beauchamp, if you assure me that M. de Morcerf doesnot know these pistols, you may readily believe that yourword will be quite sufficient."

　　"Gentlemen," said Chateau-Renaud, "it is not Morcerf comingin that carriage; -- faith, it is Franz and Debray!" The twoyoung men he announced were indeed approaching. "What chancebrings you here, gentlemen?" said Chateau-Renaud, shakinghands with each of them. "Because," said Debray, "Albertsent this morning to request us to come." Beauchamp andChateau-Renaud exchanged looks of astonishment. "I think Iunderstand his reason," said Morrel.

　　"What is it?"

　　"Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from M. de Morcerf,begging me to attend the opera."

　　"And I," said Debray.

　　"And I also," said Franz.

　　"And we, too," added Beauchamp and Chateau-Renaud.

　　"Having wished you all to witness the challenge, he nowwishes you to be present at the combat."

　　"Exactly so," said the young men; "you have probably guessedright."

　　"But, after all these arrangements, he does not comehimself," said Chateau-Renaud. "Albert is ten minutes aftertime."

　　"There he comes," said Beauchamp, "on horseback, at fullgallop, followed by a servant."

　　"How imprudent," said Chateau-Renaud, "to come on horsebackto fight a duel with pistols, after all the instructions Ihad given him."

　　"And besides," said Beauchamp, "with a collar above hiscravat, an open coat and white waistcoat! Why has he notpainted a spot upon his heart? -- it would have been moresimple." Meanwhile Albert had arrived within ten paces ofthe group formed by the five young men. He jumped from hishorse, threw the bridle on his servant's arms, and joinedthem. He was pale, and his eyes were red and swollen; it wasevident that he had not slept. A shade of melancholy gravityoverspread his countenance, which was not natural to him. "Ithank you, gentlemen," said he, "for having complied with myrequest; I feel extremely grateful for this mark offriendship." Morrel had stepped back as Morcerf approached,and remained at a short distance. "And to you also, M.Morrel, my thanks are due. Come, there cannot be too many."

　　"Sir," said Maximilian, "you are not perhaps aware that I amM. de Monte Cristo's friend?"

　　"I was not sure, but I thought it might be so. So much thebetter; the more honorable men there are here the better Ishall be satisfied."

　　"M. Morrel," said Chateau-Renaud, "will you apprise theCount of Monte Cristo that M. de Morcerf is arrived, and weare at his disposal?" Morrel was preparing to fulfil hiscommission. Beauchamp had meanwhile drawn the box of pistolsfrom the carriage. "Stop, gentlemen," said Albert; "I havetwo words to say to the Count of Monte Cristo."

　　"In private?" asked Morrel.

　　"No, sir; before all who are here."

　　Albert's witnesses looked at each other. Franz and Debrayexchanged some words in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced atthis unexpected incident, went to fetch the count, who waswalking in a retired path with Emmanuel. "What does he wantwith me?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"I do not know, but he wishes to speak to you."

　　"Ah?" said Monte Cristo, "I trust he is not going to temptme by some fresh insult!"

　　"I do not think that such is his intention," said Morrel.

　　The count advanced, accompanied by Maximilian and Emmanuel.His calm and serene look formed a singular contrast toAlbert's grief-stricken face, who approached also, followedby the other four young men. When at three paces distantfrom each other, Albert and the count stopped.

　　"Approach, gentlemen," said Albert; "I wish you not to loseone word of what I am about to have the honor of saying tothe Count of Monte Cristo, for it must be repeated by you toall who will listen to it, strange as it may appear to you."

　　"Proceed, sir," said the count.

　　"Sir," said Albert, at first with a tremulous voice, butwhich gradually because firmer, "I reproached you withexposing the conduct of M. de Morcerf in Epirus, for guiltyas I knew he was, I thought you had no right to punish him;but I have since learned that you had that right. It is notFernand Mondego's treachery towards Ali Pasha which inducesme so readily to excuse you, but the treachery of thefisherman Fernand towards you, and the almost unheard-ofmiseries which were its consequences; and I say, andproclaim it publicly, that you were justified in revengingyourself on my father, and I, his son, thank you for notusing greater severity."

　　Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators ofthis unexpected scene, it would not have surprised them morethan did Albert's declaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyesslowly rose towards heaven with an expression of infinitegratitude. He could not understand how Albert's fierynature, of which he had seen so much among the Romanbandits, had suddenly stooped to this humiliation. Herecognized the influence of Mercedes, and saw why her nobleheart had not opposed the sacrifice she knew beforehandwould be useless. "Now, sir," said Albert, "if you think myapology sufficient, pray give me your hand. Next to themerit of infallibility which you appear to possess, I rankthat of candidly acknowledging a fault. But this confessionconcerns me only. I acted well as a man, but you have actedbetter than man. An angel alone could have saved one of usfrom death -- that angel came from heaven, if not to make usfriends (which, alas, fatality renders impossible), at leastto make us esteem each other."

　　Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lipshalf open, extended to Albert a hand which the latterpressed with a sentiment resembling respectful fear."Gentlemen," said he, "M. de Monte Cristo receives myapology. I had acted hastily towards him. Hasty actions aregenerally bad ones. Now my fault is repaired. I hope theworld will not call me cowardly for acting as my consciencedictated. But if any one should entertain a false opinion ofme," added he, drawing himself up as if he would challengeboth friends and enemies, "I shall endeavor to correct hismistake."

　　"What happened during the night?" asked Beauchamp ofChateau-Renaud; "we appear to make a very sorry figurehere."

　　"In truth, what Albert has just done is either verydespicable or very noble," replied the baron.

　　"What can it mean?" said Debray to Franz. "The Count ofMonte Cristo acts dishonorably to M. de Morcerf, and isjustified by his son! Had I ten Yaninas in my family, Ishould only consider myself the more bound to fight tentimes." As for Monte Cristo, his head was bent down, hisarms were powerless. Bowing under the weight of twenty-fouryears' reminiscences, he thought not of Albert, ofBeauchamp, of Chateau-Renaud, or of any of that group; buthe thought of that courageous woman who had come to pleadfor her son's life, to whom he had offered his, and who hadnow saved it by the revelation of a dreadful family secret,capable of destroying forever in that young man's heartevery feeling of filial piety.

　　"Providence still," murmured he; "now only am I fullyconvinced of being the emissary of God!"

　　Chapter 91Mother and Son.

　　The Count of Monte Cristo bowed to the five young men with amelancholy and dignified smile, and got into his carriagewith Maximilian and Emmanuel. Albert, Beauchamp, andChateau-Renaud remained alone. Albert looked at his twofriends, not timidly, but in a way that appeared to asktheir opinion of what he had just done.

　　"Indeed, my dear friend," said Beauchamp first, who hadeither the most feeling or the least dissimulation, "allowme to congratulate you; this is a very unhoped-forconclusion of a very disagreeable affair."

　　Albert remained silent and wrapped in thought.Chateau-Renaud contented himself with tapping his boot withhis flexible cane. "Are we not going?" said he, after thisembarrassing silence. "When you please," replied Beauchamp;"allow me only to compliment M. de Morcerf, who has givenproof to-day of rare chivalric generosity."

　　"Oh, yes," said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"It is magnificent," continued Beauchamp, "to be able toexercise so much self-control!"

　　"Assuredly; as for me, I should have been incapable of it,"said Chateau-Renaud, with most significant coolness.

　　"Gentlemen," interrupted Albert, "I think you did notunderstand that something very serious had passed between M.de Monte Cristo and myself."

　　"Possibly, possibly," said Beauchamp immediately; "but everysimpleton would not be able to understand your heroism, andsooner or later you will find yourself compelled to explainit to them more energetically than would be convenient toyour bodily health and the duration of your life. May I giveyou a friendly counsel? Set out for Naples, the Hague, orSt. Petersburg -- calm countries, where the point of honoris better understood than among our hot-headed Parisians.Seek quietude and oblivion, so that you may return peaceablyto France after a few years. Am I not right, M. deChateau-Renaud?"

　　"That is quite my opinion," said the gentleman; "nothinginduces serious duels so much as a duel forsworn."

　　"Thank you, gentlemen," replied Albert, with a smile ofindifference; "I shall follow your advice -- not because yougive it, but because I had before intended to quit France. Ithank you equally for the service you have rendered me inbeing my seconds. It is deeply engraved on my heart, and,after what you have just said, I remember that only."Chateau-Renaud and Beauchamp looked at each other; theimpression was the same on both of them, and the tone inwhich Morcerf had just expressed his thanks was sodetermined that the position would have become embarrassingfor all if the conversation had continued.

　　"Good-by, Albert," said Beauchamp suddenly, carelesslyextending his hand to the young man. The latter did notappear to arouse from his lethargy; in fact, he did notnotice the offered hand. "Good-by," said Chateau-Renaud inhis turn, keeping his little cane in his left hand, andsaluting with his right. Albert's lips scarcely whispered"Good-by," but his look was more explicit; it expressed awhole poem of restrained anger, proud disdain, and generousindignation. He preserved his melancholy and motionlessposition for some time after his two friends had regainedtheir carriage; then suddenly unfastening his horse from thelittle tree to which his servant had tied it, he mounted andgalloped off in the direction of Paris.

　　In a quarter of an hour he was entering the house in the Ruedu Helder. As he alighted, he thought he saw his father'spale face behind the curtain of the count's bedroom. Albertturned away his head with a sigh, and went to his ownapartments. He cast one lingering look on all the luxurieswhich had rendered life so easy and so happy since hisinfancy; he looked at the pictures, whose faces seemed tosmile, and the landscapes, which appeared painted inbrighter colors. Then he took away his mother's portrait,with its oaken frame, leaving the gilt frame from which hetook it black and empty. Then he arranged all his beautifulTurkish arms, his fine English guns, his Japanese china, hiscups mounted in silver, his artistic bronzes by Feucheresand Barye; examined the cupboards, and placed the key ineach; threw into a drawer of his secretary, which he leftopen, all the pocket-money he had about him, and with it thethousand fancy jewels from his vases and his jewel-boxes;then he made an exact inventory of everything, and placed itin the most conspicuous part of the table, after puttingaside the books and papers which had collected there.

　　At the beginning of this work, his servant, notwithstandingorders to the contrary, came to his room. "What do youwant?" asked he, with a more sorrowful than angry tone."Pardon me, sir," replied the valet; "you had forbidden meto disturb you, but the Count of Morcerf has called me."

　　"Well!" said Albert.

　　"I did not like to go to him without first seeing you."

　　"Why?"

　　"Because the count is doubtless aware that I accompanied youto the meeting this morning."

　　"It is probable," said Albert.

　　"And since he has sent for me, it is doubtless to questionme on what happened there. What must I answer?"

　　"The truth."

　　"Then I shall say the duel did not take place?"

　　"You will say I apologized to the Count of Monte Cristo.Go."

　　The valet bowed and retired, and Albert returned to hisinventory. As he was finishing this work, the sound ofhorses prancing in the yard, and the wheels of a carriageshaking his window, attracted his attention. He approachedthe window, and saw his father get into it, and drive away.The door was scarcely closed when Albert bent his steps tohis mother's room; and, no one being there to announce him,he advanced to her bed-chamber, and distressed by what hesaw and guessed, stopped for one moment at the door. As ifthe same idea had animated these two beings, Mercedes wasdoing the same in her apartments that he had just done inhis. Everything was in order, -- laces, dresses, jewels,linen, money, all were arranged in the drawers, and thecountess was carefully collecting the keys. Albert saw allthese preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, "Mymother!" he threw his arms around her neck.

　　The artist who could have depicted the expression of thesetwo countenances would certainly have made of them abeautiful picture. All these proofs of an energeticresolution, which Albert did not fear on his own account,alarmed him for his mother. "What are you doing?" asked he.

　　"What were you doing?" replied she.

　　"Oh, my mother!" exclaimed Albert, so overcome he couldscarcely speak; "it is not the same with you and me -- youcannot have made the same resolution I have, for I have cometo warn you that I bid adieu to your house, and -- and toyou."

　　"I also," replied Mercedes, "am going, and I acknowledge Ihad depended on your accompanying me; have I deceivedmyself?"

　　"Mother," said Albert with firmness. "I cannot make youshare the fate I have planned for myself. I must livehenceforth without rank and fortune, and to begin this hardapprenticeship I must borrow from a friend the loaf I shalleat until I have earned one. So, my dear mother, I am goingat once to ask Franz to lend me the small sum I shallrequire to supply my present wants."

　　"You, my poor child, suffer poverty and hunger? Oh, do notsay so; it will break my resolutions."

　　"But not mine, mother," replied Albert. "I am young andstrong; I believe I am courageous, and since yesterday Ihave learned the power of will. Alas, my dear mother, somehave suffered so much, and yet live, and have raised a newfortune on the ruin of all the promises of happiness whichheaven had made them -- on the fragments of all the hopewhich God had given them! I have seen that, mother; I knowthat from the gulf in which their enemies have plunged themthey have risen with so much vigor and glory that in theirturn they have ruled their former conquerors, and havepunished them. No. mother; from this moment I have done withthe past, and accept nothing from it -- not even a name,because you can understand that your son cannot bear thename of a man who ought to blush for it before another."

　　"Albert, my child," said Mercedes, "if I had a strongerheart that is the counsel I would have given you; yourconscience has spoken when my voice became too weak; listento its dictates. You had friends, Albert; break off theiracquaintance. But do not despair; you have life before you,my dear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two yearsold; and as a pure heart like yours wants a spotless name,take my father's -- it was Herrera. I am sure, my dearAlbert, whatever may be your career, you will soon renderthat name illustrious. Then, my son, return to the worldstill more brilliant because of your former sorrows; and ifI am wrong, still let me cherish these hopes, for I have nofuture to look forward to. For me the grave opens when Ipass the threshold of this house."

　　"I will fulfil all your wishes, my dear mother," said theyoung man. "Yes, I share your hopes; the anger of heavenwill not pursue us, since you are pure and I am innocent.But, since our resolution is formed, let us act promptly. M.de Morcerf went out about half an hour ago; the opportunityin favorable to avoid an explanation."

　　"I am ready, my son," said Mercedes. Albert ran to fetch acarriage. He recollected that there was a small furnishedhouse to let in the Rue de Saints Peres, where his motherwould find a humble but decent lodging, and thither heintended conducting the countess. As the carriage stopped atthe door, and Albert was alighting, a man approached andgave him a letter. Albert recognized the bearer. "From thecount," said Bertuccio. Albert took the letter, opened, andread it, then looked round for Bertuccio, but he was gone.He returned to Mercedes with tears in his eyes and heavingbreast, and without uttering a word he gave her the letter.Mercedes read: --

　　Albert, -- While showing you that I have discovered yourplans, I hope also to convince you of my delicacy. You arefree, you leave the count's house, and you take your motherto your home; but reflect, Albert, you owe her more thanyour poor noble heart can pay her. Keep the struggle foryourself, bear all the suffering, but spare her the trial ofpoverty which must accompany your first efforts; for shedeserves not even the shadow of the misfortune which hasthis day fallen on her, and providence is not willing thatthe innocent should suffer for the guilty. I know you aregoing to leave the Rue du Helder without taking anythingwith you. Do not seek to know how I discovered it; I know it-- that is sufficient.

　　Now, listen, Albert. Twenty-four years ago I returned, proudand joyful, to my country. I had a betrothed, Albert, alovely girl whom I adored, and I was bringing to mybetrothed a hundred and fifty louis, painfully amassed byceaseless toil. This money was for her; I destined it forher, and, knowing the treachery of the sea I buried ourtreasure in the little garden of the house my father livedin at Marseilles, on the Allees de Meillan. Your mother,Albert, knows that poor house well. A short time since Ipassed through Marseilles, and went to see the old place,which revived so many painful recollections; and in theevening I took a spade and dug in the corner of the gardenwhere I had concealed my treasure. The iron box was there --no one had touched it -- under a beautiful fig-tree myfather had planted the day I was born, which overshadowedthe spot. Well, Albert, this money, which was formerlydesigned to promote the comfort and tranquillity of thewoman I adored, may now, through strange and painfulcircumstances, be devoted to the same purpose. Oh, feel forme, who could offer millions to that poor woman, but whoreturn her only the piece of black bread forgotten under mypoor roof since the day I was torn from her I loved. You area generous man, Albert, but perhaps you may be blinded bypride or resentment; if you refuse me, if you ask anotherfor what I have a right to offer you, I will say it isungenerous of you to refuse the life of your mother at thehands of a man whose father was allowed by your father todie in all the horrors of poverty and despair.

　　Albert stood pale and motionless to hear what his motherwould decide after she had finished reading this letter.Mercedes turned her eyes with an ineffable look towardsheaven. "I accept it," said she; "he has a right to pay thedowry, which I shall take with me to some convent!" Puttingthe letter in her bosom, she took her son's arm, and with afirmer step than she even herself expected she wentdown-stairs.

　　Chapter 92The Suicide.

　　Meanwhile Monte Cristo had also returned to town withEmmanuel and Maximilian. Their return was cheerful. Emmanueldid not conceal his joy at the peaceful termination of theaffair, and was loud in his expressions of delight. Morrel,in a corner of the carriage, allowed his brother-in-law'sgayety to expend itself in words, while he felt equal inwardjoy, which, however, betrayed itself only in hiscountenance. At the Barriere du Trone they met Bertuccio,who was waiting there, motionless as a sentinel at his post.Monte Cristo put his head out of the window, exchanged a fewwords with him in a low tone, and the steward disappeared."Count," said Emmanuel, when they were at the end of thePlace Royale, "put me down at my door, that my wife may nothave a single moment of needless anxiety on my account oryours."

　　"If it were not ridiculous to make a display of our triumph,I would invite the count to our house; besides that, hedoubtless has some trembling heart to comfort. So we willtake leave of our friend, and let him hasten home."

　　"Stop a moment," said Monte Cristo; "do not let me lose bothmy companions. Return, Emmanuel, to your charming wife, andpresent my best compliments to her; and do you, Morrel,accompany me to the Champs Elysees."

　　"Willingly," said Maximilian; "particularly as I havebusiness in that quarter."

　　"Shall we wait breakfast for you?" asked Emmanuel.

　　"No," replied the young man. The door was closed, and thecarriage proceeded. "See what good fortune I brought you!"said Morrel, when he was alone with the count. "Have you notthought so?"

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "for that reason I wished to keepyou near me."

　　"It is miraculous!" continued Morrel, answering his ownthoughts.

　　"What?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"What has just happened."

　　"Yes," said the Count, "you are right -- it is miraculous."

　　"For Albert is brave," resumed Morrel.

　　"Very brave," said Monte Cristo; "I have seen him sleep witha sword suspended over his head."

　　"And I know he has fought two duels," said Morrel. "How canyou reconcile that with his conduct this morning?"

　　"All owing to your influence," replied Monte Cristo,smiling.

　　"It is well for Albert he is not in the army," said Morrel.

　　"Why?"

　　"An apology on the ground!" said the young captain, shakinghis head.

　　"Come," said the count mildly, "do not entertain theprejudices of ordinary men, Morrel! Acknowledge, that ifAlbert is brave, he cannot be a coward; he must then havehad some reason for acting as he did this morning, andconfess that his conduct is more heroic than otherwise."

　　"Doubtless, doubtless," said Morrel; "but I shall say, likethe Spaniard, `He has not been so brave to-day as he wasyesterday.'"

　　"You will breakfast with me, will you not, Morrel?" said thecount, to turn the conversation.

　　"No; I must leave you at ten o'clock."

　　"Your engagement was for breakfast, then?" said the count.

　　Morrel smiled, and shook his head. "Still you must breakfastsomewhere."

　　"But if I am not hungry?" said the young man.

　　"Oh," said the count, "I only know two things which destroythe appetite, -- grief -- and as I am happy to see you verycheerful, it is not that -- and love. Now after what youtold me this morning of your heart, I may believe" --

　　"Well, count," replied Morrel gayly, "I will not disputeit."

　　"But you will not make me your confidant, Maximilian?" saidthe count, in a tone which showed how gladly he would havebeen admitted to the secret.

　　"I showed you this morning that I had a heart, did I not,count?" Monte Cristo only answered by extending his hand tothe young man. "Well," continued the latter, "since thatheart is no longer with you in the Bois de Vincennes, it iselsewhere, and I must go and find it."

　　"Go," said the count deliberately; "go, dear friend, butpromise me if you meet with any obstacle to remember that Ihave some power in this world, that I am happy to use thatpower in the behalf of those I love, and that I love you,Morrel."

　　"I will remember it," said the young man, "as selfishchildren recollect their parents when they want their aid.When I need your assistance, and the moment arrives, I willcome to you, count."

　　"Well, I rely upon your promise. Good-by, then."

　　"Good-by, till we meet again." They had arrived in theChamps Elysees. Monte Cristo opened the carriage-door,Morrel sprang out on the pavement, Bertuccio was waiting onthe steps. Morrel disappeared down the Avenue de Marigny,and Monte Cristo hastened to join Bertuccio.

　　"Well?" asked he.

　　"She is going to leave her house," said the steward.

　　"And her son?"

　　"Florentin, his valet, thinks he is going to do the same."

　　"Come this way." Monte Cristo took Bertuccio into his study,wrote the letter we have seen, and gave it to the steward."Go," said he quickly. "But first, let Haidee be informedthat I have returned."

　　"Here I am," said the young girl, who at the sound of thecarriage had run down-stairs and whose face was radiant withjoy at seeing the count return safely. Bertuccio left. Everytransport of a daughter finding a father, all the delight ofa mistress seeing an adored lover, were felt by Haideeduring the first moments of this meeting, which she had soeagerly expected. Doubtless, although less evident, MonteCristo's joy was not less intense. Joy to hearts which havesuffered long is like the dew on the ground after a longdrought; both the heart and the ground absorb thatbenificent moisture falling on them, and nothing isoutwardly apparent.

　　Monte Cristo was beginning to think, what he had not for along time dared to believe, that there were two Mercedes inthe world, and he might yet be happy. His eye, elate withhappiness, was reading eagerly the tearful gaze of Haidee,when suddenly the door opened. The count knit his brow. "M.de Morcerf!" said Baptistin, as if that name sufficed forhis excuse. In fact, the count's face brightened.

　　"Which," asked he, "the viscount or the count?"

　　"The count."

　　"Oh," exclaimed Haidee, "is it not yet over?"

　　"I know not if it is finished, my beloved child," said MonteCristo, taking the young girl's hands; "but I do know youhave nothing more to fear."

　　"But it is the wretched" --

　　"That man cannot injure me, Haidee," said Monte Cristo; "itwas his son alone that there was cause to fear."

　　"And what I have suffered," said the young girl, "you shallnever know, my lord." Monte Cristo smiled. "By my father'stomb," said he, extending his hand over the head of theyoung girl, "I swear to you, Haidee, that if any misfortunehappens, it will not be to me."

　　"I believe you, my lord, as implicitly as if God had spokento me," said the young girl, presenting her forehead to him.Monte Cristo pressed on that pure beautiful forehead a kisswhich made two hearts throb at once, the one violently, theother heavily. "Oh," murmured the count, "shall I then bepermitted to love again? Ask M. de Morcerf into thedrawing-room," said he to Baptistin, while he led thebeautiful Greek girl to a private staircase.

　　We must explain this visit, which although expected by MonteCristo, is unexpected to our readers. While Mercedes, as wehave said, was making a similar inventory of her property toAlbert's, while she was arranging her jewels, shutting herdrawers, collecting her keys, to leave everything in perfectorder, she did not perceive a pale and sinister face at aglass door which threw light into the passage, from whicheverything could be both seen and heard. He who was thuslooking, without being heard or seen, probably heard and sawall that passed in Madame de Morcerf's apartments. From thatglass door the pale-faced man went to the count's bedroomand raised with a constricted hand the curtain of a windowoverlooking the court-yard. He remained there ten minutes,motionless and dumb, listening to the beating of his ownheart. For him those ten minutes were very long. It was thenAlbert, returning from his meeting with the count, perceivedhis father watching for his arrival behind a curtain, andturned aside. The count's eye expanded; he knew Albert hadinsulted the count dreadfully, and that in every country inthe world such an insult would lead to a deadly duel. Albertreturned safely -- then the count was revenged.

　　An indescribable ray of joy illumined that wretchedcountenance like the last ray of the sun before itdisappears behind the clouds which bear the aspect, not of adowny couch, but of a tomb. But as we have said, he waitedin vain for his son to come to his apartment with theaccount of his triumph. He easily understood why his son didnot come to see him before he went to avenge his father'shonor; but when that was done, why did not his son come andthrow himself into his arms?

　　It was then, when the count could not see Albert, that hesent for his servant, who he knew was authorized not toconceal anything from him. Ten minutes afterwards, GeneralMorcerf was seen on the steps in a black coat with amilitary collar, black pantaloons, and black gloves. He hadapparently given previous orders, for as he reached thebottom step his carriage came from the coach-house ready forhim. The valet threw into the carriage his military cloak,in which two swords were wrapped, and, shutting the door, hetook his seat by the side of the coachman. The coachmanstooped down for his orders.

　　"To the Champs Elysees," said the general; "the Count ofMonte Cristo's. Hurry!" The horses bounded beneath the whip;and in five minutes they stopped before the count's door. M.de Morcerf opened the door himself, and as the carriagerolled away he passed up the walk, rang, and entered theopen door with his servant.

　　A moment afterwards, Baptistin announced the Count ofMorcerf to Monte Cristo, and the latter, leading Haideeaside, ordered that Morcerf be asked into the drawing-room.The general was pacing the room the third time when, inturning, he perceived Monte Cristo at the door. "Ah, it isM. de Morcerf," said Monte Cristo quietly; "I thought I hadnot heard aright."

　　"Yes, it is I," said the count, whom a frightful contractionof the lips prevented from articulating freely.

　　"May I know the cause which procures me the pleasure ofseeing M. de Morcerf so early?"

　　"Had you not a meeting with my son this morning?" asked thegeneral.

　　"I had," replied the count.

　　"And I know my son had good reasons to wish to fight withyou, and to endeavor to kill you."

　　"Yes, sir, he had very good ones; but you see that in spiteof them he has not killed me, and did not even fight."

　　"Yet he considered you the cause of his father's dishonor,the cause of the fearful ruin which has fallen on my house."

　　"It is true, sir," said Monte Cristo with his dreadfulcalmness; "a secondary cause, but not the principal."

　　"Doubtless you made, then, some apology or explanation?"

　　"I explained nothing, and it is he who apologized to me."

　　"But to what do you attribute this conduct?"

　　"To the conviction, probably, that there was one more guiltythan I."

　　"And who was that?"

　　"His father."

　　"That may be," said the count, turning pale; "but you knowthe guilty do not like to find themselves convicted."

　　"I know it, and I expected this result."

　　"You expected my son would be a coward?" cried the count.

　　"M. Albert de Morcerf is no coward!" said Monte Cristo.

　　"A man who holds a sword in his hand, and sees a mortalenemy within reach of that sword, and does not fight, is acoward! Why is he not here that I may tell him so?"

　　"Sir." replied Monte Cristo coldly, "I did not expect thatyou had come here to relate to me your little familyaffairs. Go and tell M. Albert that, and he may know what toanswer you."

　　"Oh, no, no," said the general, smiling faintly, "I did notcome for that purpose; you are right. I came to tell youthat I also look upon you as my enemy. I came to tell youthat I hate you instinctively; that it seems as if I hadalways known you, and always hated you; and, in short, sincethe young people of the present day will not fight, itremains for us to do so. Do you think so, sir?"

　　"Certainly. And when I told you I had foreseen the result,it is the honor of your visit I alluded to."

　　"So much the better. Are you prepared?"

　　"Yes, sir."

　　"You know that we shall fight till one of us is dead," saidthe general, whose teeth were clinched with rage. "Until oneof us dies," repeated Monte Cristo, moving his head slightlyup and down.

　　"Let us start, then; we need no witnesses."

　　"Very true," said Monte Cristo; "it is unnecessary, we knoweach other so well!"

　　"On the contrary," said the count, "we know so little ofeach other."

　　"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo, with the same indomitablecoolness; "let us see. Are you not the soldier Fernand whodeserted on the eve of the battle of Waterloo? Are you notthe Lieutenant Fernand who served as guide and spy to theFrench army in Spain? Are you not the Captain Fernand whobetrayed, sold, and murdered his benefactor, Ali? And havenot all these Fernands, united, made Lieutenant-General, theCount of Morcerf, peer of France?"

　　"Oh," cried the general, as it branded with a hot iron,"wretch, -- to reproach me with my shame when about,perhaps, to kill me! No, I did not say I was a stranger toyou. I know well, demon, that you have penetrated into thedarkness of the past, and that you have read, by the lightof what torch I know not, every page of my life; but perhapsI may be more honorable in my shame than you under yourpompous coverings. No -- no, I am aware you know me; but Iknow you only as an adventurer sewn up in gold andjewellery. You call yourself in Paris the Count of MonteCristo; in Italy, Sinbad the Sailor; in Malta, I forgetwhat. But it is your real name I want to know, in the midstof your hundred names, that I may pronounce it when we meetto fight, at the moment when I plunge my sword through yourheart."

　　The Count of Monte Cristo turned dreadfully pale; his eyeseemed to burn with a devouring fire. He leaped towards adressing-room near his bedroom, and in less than a moment,tearing off his cravat, his coat and waistcoat, he put on asailor's jacket and hat, from beneath which rolled his longblack hair. He returned thus, formidable and implacable,advancing with his arms crossed on his breast, towards thegeneral, who could not understand why he had disappeared,but who on seeing him again, and feeling his teeth chatterand his legs sink under him, drew back, and only stoppedwhen he found a table to support his clinched hand."Fernand," cried he, "of my hundred names I need only tellyou one, to overwhelm you! But you guess it now, do you not?-- or, rather, you remember it? For, notwithstanding all mysorrows and my tortures, I show you to-day a face which thehappiness of revenge makes young again -- a face you mustoften have seen in your dreams since your marriage withMercedes, my betrothed!"

　　The general, with his head thrown back, hands extended, gazefixed, looked silently at this dreadful apparition; thenseeking the wall to support him, he glided along close to ituntil he reached the door, through which he went outbackwards, uttering this single mournful, lamentable,distressing cry, -- "Edmond Dantes!" Then, with sighs whichwere unlike any human sound, he dragged himself to the door,reeled across the court-yard, and falling into the arms ofhis valet, he said in a voice scarcely intelligible, --"Home, home." The fresh air and the shame he felt at havingexposed himself before his servants, partly recalled hissenses, but the ride was short, and as he drew near hishouse all his wretchedness revived. He stopped at a shortdistance from the house and alighted.

　　The door was wide open, a hackney-coach was standing in themiddle of the yard -- a strange sight before so noble amansion; the count looked at it with terror, but withoutdaring to inquire its meaning, he rushed towards hisapartment. Two persons were coming down the stairs; he hadonly time to creep into an alcove to avoid them. It wasMercedes leaning on her son's arm and leaving the house.They passed close by the unhappy being, who, concealedbehind the damask curtain, almost felt Mercedes dress brushpast him, and his son's warm breath, pronouncing thesewords, -- "Courage, mother! Come, this is no longer ourhome!" The words died away, the steps were lost in thedistance. The general drew himself up, clinging to thecurtain; he uttered the most dreadful sob which ever escapedfrom the bosom of a father abandoned at the same time by hiswife and son. He soon heard the clatter of the iron step ofthe hackney-coach, then the coachman's voice, and then therolling of the heavy vehicle shook the windows. He darted tohis bedroom to see once more all he had loved in the world;but the hackney-coach drove on and the head of neitherMercedes nor her son appeared at the window to take a lastlook at the house or the deserted father and husband. And atthe very moment when the wheels of that coach crossed thegateway a report was heard, and a thick smoke escapedthrough one of the panes of the window, which was broken bythe explosion.

　　Chapter 93Valentine.

　　We may easily conceive where Morrel's appointment was. Onleaving Monte Cristo he walked slowly towards Villefort's;we say slowly, for Morrel had more than half an hour tospare to go five hundred steps, but he had hastened to takeleave of Monte Cristo because he wished to be alone with histhoughts. He knew his time well -- the hour when Valentinewas giving Noirtier his breakfast, and was sure not to bedisturbed in the performance of this pious duty. Noirtierand Valentine had given him leave to go twice a week, and hewas now availing himself of that permission. He had arrived;Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and almost crazed, sheseized his hand and led him to her grandfather. Thisuneasiness, amounting almost to frenzy, arose from thereport Morcerf's adventure had made in the world, for theaffair at the opera was generally known. No one atVillefort's doubted that a duel would ensue from it.Valentine, with her woman's instinct, guessed that Morrelwould be Monte Cristo's second, and from the young man'swell-known courage and his great affection for the count,she feared that he would not content himself with thepassive part assigned to him. We may easily understand howeagerly the particulars were asked for, given, and received;and Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes ofhis beloved, when she knew that the termination of thisaffair was as happy as it was unexpected.

　　"Now," said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down nearher grandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,-- "now let us talk about our own affairs. You know,Maximilian, grandpapa once thought of leaving this house,and taking an apartment away from M. de Villefort's."

　　"Yes," said Maximilian, "I recollect the project, of which Ihighly approved."

　　"Well," said Valentine, "you may approve again, forgrandpapa is again thinking of it."

　　"Bravo," said Maximilian.

　　"And do you know," said Valentine, "what reason grandpapagives for leaving this house." Noirtier looked at Valentineto impose silence, but she did not notice him; her looks,her eyes, her smile, were all for Morrel.

　　"Oh, whatever may be M. Noirtier's reason," answered Morrel,"I can readily believe it to be a good one."

　　"An excellent one," said Valentine. "He pretends the air ofthe Faubourg St. Honore is not good for me."

　　"Indeed?" said Morrel; "in that M. Noirtier may be right;you have not seemed to be well for the last fortnight."

　　"Not very," said Valentine. "And grandpapa has become myphysician, and I have the greatest confidence in him,because he knows everything."

　　"Do you then really suffer?" asked Morrel quickly.

　　"Oh, it must not be called suffering; I feel a generaluneasiness, that is all. I have lost my appetite, and mystomach feels as if it were struggling to get accustomed tosomething." Noirtier did not lose a word of what Valentinesaid. "And what treatment do you adopt for this singularcomplaint?"

　　"A very simple one," said Valentine. "I swallow everymorning a spoonful of the mixture prepared for mygrandfather. When I say one spoonful, I began by one -- nowI take four. Grandpapa says it is a panacea." Valentinesmiled, but it was evident that she suffered.

　　Maximilian, in his devotedness, gazed silently at her. Shewas very beautiful, but her usual pallor had increased; hereyes were more brilliant than ever, and her hands, whichwere generally white like mother-of-pearl, now moreresembled wax, to which time was adding a yellowish hue.From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier. Thelatter watched with strange and deep interest the younggirl, absorbed by her affection, and he also, like Morrel,followed those traces of inward suffering which was solittle perceptible to a common observer that they escapedthe notice of every one but the grandfather and the lover.

　　"But," said Morrel, "I thought this mixture, of which younow take four spoonfuls, was prepared for M. Noirtier?"

　　"I know it is very bitter," said Valentine; "so bitter, thatall I drink afterwards appears to have the same taste."Noirtier looked inquiringly at his granddaughter. "Yes,grandpapa," said Valentine; "it is so. Just now, before Icame down to you, I drank a glass of sugared water; I lefthalf, because it seemed so bitter." Noirtier turned pale,and made a sign that he wished to speak. Valentine rose tofetch the dictionary. Noirtier watched her with evidentanguish. In fact, the blood was rushing to the young girl'shead already, her cheeks were becoming red. "Oh," cried she,without losing any of her cheerfulness, "this is singular! Ican't see! Did the sun shine in my eyes?" And she leanedagainst the window.

　　"The sun is not shining," said Morrel, more alarmed byNoirtier's expression than by Valentine's indisposition. Heran towards her. The young girl smiled. "Cheer up," said sheto Noirtier. "Do not be alarmed, Maximilian; it is nothing,and has already passed away. But listen! Do I not hear acarriage in the court-yard?" She opened Noirtier's door, ranto a window in the passage, and returned hastily. "Yes,"said she, "it is Madame Danglars and her daughter, who havecome to call on us. Good-by; -- I must run away, for theywould send here for me, or, rather, farewell till I see youagain. Stay with grandpapa, Maximilian; I promise you not topersuade them to stay."

　　Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascendthe little staircase which led both to Madame de Villefort'sapartments and to hers. As soon as she was gone, Noirtiermade a sign to Morrel to take the dictionary. Morrel obeyed;guided by Valentine, he had learned how to understand theold man quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to the work,he had to repeat most of the letters of the alphabet and tofind every word in the dictionary, so that it was tenminutes before the thought of the old man was translated bythese words, "Fetch the glass of water and the decanter fromValentine's room."

　　Morrel rang immediately for the servant who had takenBarrois's situation, and in Noirtier's name gave that order.The servant soon returned. The decanter and the glass werecompletely empty. Noirtier made a sign that he wished tospeak. "Why are the glass and decanter empty?" asked he;"Valentine said she only drank half the glassful." Thetranslation of this new question occupied another fiveminutes. "I do not know," said the servant, "but thehousemaid is in Mademoiselle Valentine's room: perhaps shehas emptied them."

　　"Ask her," said Morrel, translating Noirtier's thought thistime by his look. The servant went out, but returned almostimmediately. "Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the roomto go to Madame de Villefort's," said he; "and in passing,as she was thirsty, she drank what remained in the glass; asfor the decanter, Master Edward had emptied that to make apond for his ducks." Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, asa gambler does who stakes his all on one stroke. From thatmoment the old man's eyes were fixed on the door, and didnot quit it.

　　It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whomValentine had seen; they had been ushered into Madame deVillefort's room, who had said she would receive them there.That is why Valentine passed through her room, which was ona level with Valentine's, and only separated from it byEdward's. The two ladies entered the drawing-room with thatsort of official stiffness which preludes a formalcommunication. Among worldly people manner is contagious.Madame de Villefort received them with equal solemnity.Valentine entered at this moment, and the formalities wereresumed. "My dear friend," said the baroness, while the twoyoung people were shaking hands, "I and Eugenie are come tobe the first to announce to you the approaching marriage ofmy daughter with Prince Cavalcanti." Danglars kept up thetitle of prince. The popular banker found that it answeredbetter than count. "Allow me to present you my sincerecongratulations," replied Madame de Villefort. "PrinceCavalcanti appears to be a young man of rare qualities."

　　"Listen," said the baroness, smiling; "speaking to you as afriend I can say that the prince does not yet appear all hewill be. He has about him a little of that foreign manner bywhich French persons recognize, at first sight, the Italianor German nobleman. Besides, he gives evidence of greatkindness of disposition, much keenness of wit, and as tosuitability, M. Danglars assures me that his fortune ismajestic -- that is his word."

　　"And then," said Eugenie, while turning over the leaves ofMadame de Villefort's album, "add that you have taken agreat fancy to the young man."

　　"And," said Madame de Villefort, "I need not ask you if youshare that fancy."

　　"I?" replied Eugenie with her usual candor. "Oh, not theleast in the world, madame! My wish was not to confinemyself to domestic cares, or the caprices of any man, but tobe an artist, and consequently free in heart, in person, andin thought." Eugenie pronounced these words with so firm atone that the color mounted to Valentine's cheeks. The timidgirl could not understand that vigorous nature whichappeared to have none of the timidities of woman.

　　"At any rate," said she, "since I am to be married whether Iwill or not, I ought to be thankful to providence for havingreleased me from my engagement with M. Albert de Morcerf, orI should this day have been the wife of a dishonored man."

　　"It is true," said the baroness, with that strangesimplicity sometimes met with among fashionable ladies, andof which plebeian intercourse can never entirely deprivethem, -- "it is very true that had not the Morcerfshesitated, my daughter would have married Monsieur Albert.The general depended much on it; he even came to force M.Danglars. We have had a narrow escape."

　　"But," said Valentine, timidly, "does all the father's shamerevert upon the son? Monsieur Albert appears to me quiteinnocent of the treason charged against the general."

　　"Excuse me," said the implacable young girl, "MonsieurAlbert claims and well deserves his share. It appears thatafter having challenged M. de Monte Cristo at the Operayesterday, he apologized on the ground to-day."

　　"Impossible," said Madame de Villefort.

　　"Ah, my dear friend," said Madame Danglars, with the samesimplicity we before noticed, "it is a fact. I heard it fromM. Debray, who was present at the explanation." Valentinealso knew the truth, but she did not answer. A single wordhad reminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M.Noirtier's room. Deeply engaged with a sort of inwardcontemplation, Valentine had ceased for a moment to join inthe conversation. She would, indeed, have found itimpossible to repeat what had been said the last fewminutes, when suddenly Madame Danglars' hand, pressed on herarm, aroused her from her lethargy.

　　"What is it?" said she, starting at Madame Danglars, touchas she would have done from an electric shock. "It is, mydear Valentine," said the baroness, "that you are,doubtless, suffering."

　　"I?" said the young girl, passing her hand across herburning forehead.

　　"Yes, look at yourself in that glass; you have turned paleand then red successively, three or four times in oneminute."

　　"Indeed," cried Eugenie, "you are very pale!"

　　"Oh, do not be alarmed; I have been so for many days."Artless as she was, the young girl knew that this was anopportunity to leave, and besides, Madame de Villefort cameto her assistance. "Retire, Valentine," said she; "you arereally suffering, and these ladies will excuse you; drink aglass of pure water, it will restore you." Valentine kissedEugenie, bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already risen totake her leave, and went out. "That poor child," said Madamede Villefort when Valentine was gone, "she makes me veryuneasy, and I should not be astonished if she had someserious illness."

　　Meanwhile, Valentine, in a sort of excitement which shecould not quite understand, had crossed Edward's roomwithout noticing some trick of the child, and through herown had reached the little staircase. She was within threesteps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel's voice, whensuddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened footmissed the step, her hands had no power to hold thebaluster, and falling against the wall she lost her balancewholly and toppled to the floor. Morrel bounded to the door,opened it, and found Valentine stretched out at the bottomof the stairs. Quick as a flash, he raised her in his armsand placed her in a chair. Valentine opened her eyes.

　　"Oh, what a clumsy thing I am," said she with feverishvolubility; "I don't know my way. I forgot there were threemore steps before the landing."

　　"You have hurt yourself, perhaps," said Morrel. "What can Ido for you, Valentine?" Valentine looked around her; she sawthe deepest terror depicted in Noirtier's eyes. "Don'tworry, dear grandpapa," said she, endeavoring to smile; "itis nothing -- it is nothing; I was giddy, that is all."

　　"Another attack of giddiness," said Morrel, clasping hishands. "Oh, attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you."

　　"But no," said Valentine, -- "no, I tell you it is all past,and it was nothing. Now, let me tell you some news; Eugenieis to be married in a week, and in three days there is to bea grand feast, a betrothal festival. We are all invited, myfather, Madame de Villefort, and I -- at least, I understoodit so."

　　"When will it be our turn to think of these things? Oh,Valentine, you who have so much influence over yourgrandpapa, try to make him answer -- Soon."

　　"And do you," said Valentine, "depend on me to stimulate thetardiness and arouse the memory of grandpapa?"

　　"Yes," cried Morrel, "make haste. So long as you are notmine, Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you."

　　"Oh," replied Valentine with a convulsive movement, "oh,indeed, Maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for asoldier who, they say, never knows fear. Ah, ha, ha!" sheburst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffenedand twisted, her head fell back on her chair, and sheremained motionless. The cry of terror which was stopped onNoirtier's lips, seemed to start from his eyes. Morrelunderstood it; he knew he must call assistance. The youngman rang the bell violently; the housemaid who had been inMademoiselle Valentine's room, and the servant who hadreplaced Barrois, ran in at the same moment. Valentine wasso pale, so cold, so inanimate that without listening towhat was said to them they were seized with the fear whichpervaded that house, and they flew into the passage cryingfor help. Madame Danglars and Eugenie were going out at thatmoment; they heard the cause of the disturbance. "I told youso!" exclaimed Madame de Villefort. "Poor child!"

　　Chapter 94Maximilian's Avowal.

　　At the same moment M. de Villefort's voice was heard callingfrom his study, "What is the matter?" Morrel looked atNoirtier who had recovered his self-command, and with aglance indicated the closet where once before under somewhatsimilar circumstances, he had taken refuge. He had only timeto get his hat and throw himself breathless into the closetwhen the procureur's footstep was heard in the passage.Villefort sprang into the room, ran to Valentine, and tookher in his arms. "A physician, a physician, -- M.d'Avrigny!" cried Villefort; "or rather I will go for himmyself." He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the samemoment darted out at the other door. He had been struck tothe heart by a frightful recollection -- the conversation hehad heard between the doctor and Villefort the night ofMadame de Saint-Meran's death, recurred to him; thesesymptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which hadpreceded the death of Barrois. At the same time MonteCristo's voice seemed to resound in his ear with the wordshe had heard only two hours before, "Whatever you want,Morrel, come to me; I have great power." More rapidly thanthought, he darted down the Rue Matignon, and thence to theAvenue des Champs Elysees.

　　Meanwhile M. de Villefort arrived in a hired cabriolet at M.d'Avrigny's door. He rang so violently that the porter wasalarmed. Villefort ran up-stairs without saying a word. Theporter knew him, and let him pass, only calling to him, "Inhis study, Monsieur Procureur -- in his study!" Villefortpushed, or rather forced, the door open. "Ah," said thedoctor, "is it you?"

　　"Yes," said Villefort, closing the door after him, "it is I,who am come in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone.Doctor, my house is accursed!"

　　"What?" said the latter with apparent coolness, but withdeep emotion, "have you another invalid?"

　　"Yes, doctor," cried Villefort, clutching his hair, "yes!"

　　D'Avrigny's look implied, "I told you it would be so." Thenhe slowly uttered these words, "Who is now dying in yourhouse? What new victim is going to accuse you of weaknessbefore God?" A mournful sob burst from Villefort's heart; heapproached the doctor, and seizing his arm, -- "Valentine,"said he, "it is Valentine's turn!"

　　"Your daughter?" cried d'Avrigny with grief and surprise.

　　"You see you were deceived," murmured the magistrate; "comeand see her, and on her bed of agony entreat her pardon forhaving suspected her."

　　"Each time you have applied to me," said the doctor, "it hasbeen too late; still I will go. But let us make haste, sir;with the enemies you have to do with there is no time to belost."

　　"Oh, this time, doctor, you shall not have to reproach mewith weakness. This time I will know the assassin, and willpursue him."

　　"Let us try first to save the victim before we think ofrevenging her," said d'Avrigny. "Come." The same cabrioletwhich had brought Villefort took them back at full speed,and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo's door. Thecount was in his study and was reading with an angry looksomething which Bertuccio had brought in haste. Hearing thename of Morrel, who had left him only two hours before, thecount raised his head, arose, and sprang to meet him. "Whatis the matter, Maximilian?" asked he; "you are pale, and theperspiration rolls from your forehead." Morrel fell into achair. "Yes," said he, "I came quickly; I wanted to speak toyou."

　　"Are all your family well?" asked the count, with anaffectionate benevolence, whose sincerity no one could for amoment doubt.

　　"Thank you, count -- thank you," said the young man,evidently embarrassed how to begin the conversation; "yes,every one in my family is well."

　　"So much the better; yet you have something to tell me?"replied the count with increased anxiety.

　　"Yes," said Morrel, "it is true; I have but now left a housewhere death has just entered, to run to you."

　　"Are you then come from M. de Morcerf's?" asked MonteCristo.

　　"No," said Morrel; "is some one dead in his house?"

　　"The general has just blown his brains out," replied MonteCristo with great coolness.

　　"Oh, what a dreadful event!" cried Maximilian.

　　"Not for the countess, or for Albert," said Monte Cristo; "adead father or husband is better than a dishonored one, --blood washes out shame."

　　"Poor countess," said Maximilian, "I pity her very much; sheis so noble a woman!"

　　"Pity Albert also, Maximilian; for believe me he is theworthy son of the countess. But let us return to yourself.You have hastened to me -- can I have the happiness of beinguseful to you?"

　　"Yes, I need your help: that is I thought like a madman thatyou could lend me your assistance in a case where God alonecan succor me."

　　"Tell me what it is," replied Monte Cristo.

　　"Oh," said Morrel, "I know not, indeed, if I may reveal thissecret to mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessityconstrains me, count" -- Morrel hesitated. "Do you think Ilove you?" said Monte Cristo, taking the young man's handaffectionately in his.

　　"Oh, you encourage me, and something tells me there,"placing his hand on his heart, "that I ought to have nosecret from you."

　　"You are right, Morrel; God is speaking to your heart, andyour heart speaks to you. Tell me what it says."

　　"Count, will you allow me to send Baptistin to inquire aftersome one you know?"

　　"I am at your service, and still more my servants."

　　"Oh, I cannot live if she is not better."

　　"Shall I ring for Baptistin?"

　　"No, I will go and speak to him myself." Morrel went out,called Baptistin, and whispered a few words to him. Thevalet ran directly. "Well, have you sent?" asked MonteCristo, seeing Morrel return.

　　"Yes, and now I shall be more calm."

　　"You know I am waiting," said Monte Cristo, smiling.

　　"Yes, and I will tell you. One evening I was in a garden; aclump of trees concealed me; no one suspected I was there.Two persons passed near me -- allow me to conceal theirnames for the present; they were speaking in an undertone,and yet I was so interested in what they said that I did notlose a single word."

　　"This is a gloomy introduction, if I may judge from yourpallor and shuddering, Morrel."

　　"Oh, yes, very gloomy, my friend. Some one had just died inthe house to which that garden belonged. One of the personswhose conversation I overheard was the master of the house;the other, the physician. The former was confiding to thelatter his grief and fear, for it was the second time withina month that death had suddenly and unexpectedly enteredthat house which was apparently destined to destruction bysome exterminating angel, as an object of God's anger."

　　"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo, looking earnestly at theyoung man, and by an imperceptible movement turning hischair, so that he remained in the shade while the light fellfull on Maximilian's face. "Yes," continued Morrel, "deathhad entered that house twice within one month."

　　"And what did the doctor answer?" asked Monte Cristo.

　　"He replied -- he replied, that the death was not a naturalone, and must be attributed" --

　　"To what?"

　　"To poison."

　　"Indeed?" said Monte Cristo with a slight cough which inmoments of extreme emotion helped him to disguise a blush,or his pallor, or the intense interest with which helistened; "indeed, Maximilian, did you hear that?"

　　"Yes, my dear count, I heard it; and the doctor added thatif another death occurred in a similar way he must appeal tojustice." Monte Cristo listened, or appeared to do so, withthe greatest calmness. "Well," said Maximilian, "death camea third time, and neither the master of the house nor thedoctor said a word. Death is now, perhaps, striking a fourthblow. Count, what am I bound to do, being in possession ofthis secret?"

　　"My dear friend," said Monte Cristo, "you appear to berelating an adventure which we all know by heart. I know thehouse where you heard it, or one very similar to it; a housewith a garden, a master, a physician, and where there havebeen three unexpected and sudden deaths. Well, I have notintercepted your confidence, and yet I know all that as wellas you, and I have no conscientious scruples. No, it doesnot concern me. You say an exterminating angel appears tohave devoted that house to God's anger -- well, who saysyour supposition is not reality? Do not notice things whichthose whose interest it is to see them pass over. If it isGod's justice, instead of his anger, which is walkingthrough that house, Maximilian, turn away your face and lethis justice accomplish its purpose." Morrel shuddered. Therewas something mournful, solemn, and terrible in the count'smanner. "Besides," continued he, in so changed a tone thatno one would have supposed it was the same person speaking-- "besides, who says that it will begin again?"

　　"It has returned, count," exclaimed Morrel; "that is why Ihastened to you."

　　"Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, forinstance, to give information to the procureur?" MonteCristo uttered the last words with so much meaning thatMorrel, starting up, cried out, "You know of whom I speak,count, do you not?"

　　"Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to youby putting the dots to the `i,' or rather by naming thepersons. You were walking one evening in M. de Villefort'sgarden; from what you relate, I suppose it to have been theevening of Madame de Saint-Meran's death. You heard M. deVillefort talking to M. d'Avrigny about the death of M. deSaint-Meran, and that no less surprising, of the countess.M. d'Avrigny said he believed they both proceeded frompoison; and you, honest man, have ever since been askingyour heart and sounding your conscience to know if you oughtto expose or conceal this secret. Why do you torment them?`Conscience, what hast thou to do with me?' as Sterne said.My dear fellow, let them sleep on, if they are asleep; letthem grow pale in their drowsiness, if they are disposed todo so, and pray do you remain in peace, who have no remorseto disturb you." Deep grief was depicted on Morrel'sfeatures; he seized Monte Cristo's hand. "But it isbeginning again, I say!"

　　"Well," said the Count, astonished at his perseverance,which he could not understand, and looking still moreearnestly at Maximilian, "let it begin again, -- it is likethe house of the Atreidae;* God has condemned them, and theymust submit to their punishment. They will all disappear,like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall,one by one, under the breath of their builder, even if thereare two hundred of them. Three months since it was M. deSaint-Meran; Madame de Saint-Meran two months since; theother day it was Barrois; to-day, the old Noirtier, or youngValentine."

　　* In the old Greek legend the Atreidae, or children ofAtreus, were doomed to punishment because of the abominablecrime of their father. The Agamemnon of Aeschylus is basedon this legend.

　　"You knew it?" cried Morrel, in such a paroxysm of terrorthat Monte Cristo started, -- he whom the falling heavenswould have found unmoved; "you knew it, and said nothing?"

　　"And what is it to me?" replied Monte Cristo, shrugging hisshoulders; "do I know those people? and must I lose the oneto save the other? Faith, no, for between the culprit andthe victim I have no choice."

　　"But I," cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, "I love her!"

　　"You love? -- whom?" cried Monte Cristo, starting to hisfeet, and seizing the two hands which Morrel was raisingtowards heaven.

　　"I love most fondly -- I love madly -- I love as a man whowould give his life-blood to spare her a tear -- I loveValentine de Villefort, who is being murdered at thismoment! Do you understand me? I love her; and I ask God andyou how I can save her?" Monte Cristo uttered a cry whichthose only can conceive who have heard the roar of a woundedlion. "Unhappy man," cried he, wringing his hands in histurn; "you love Valentine, -- that daughter of an accursedrace!" Never had Morrel witnessed such an expression --never had so terrible an eye flashed before his face --never had the genius of terror he had so often seen, eitheron the battle-field or in the murderous nights of Algeria,shaken around him more dreadful fire. He drew backterrified.

　　As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed hiseyes as if dazzled by internal light. In a moment herestrained himself so powerfully that the tempestuousheaving of his breast subsided, as turbulent and foamingwaves yield to the sun's genial influence when the cloud haspassed. This silence, self-control, and struggle lastedabout twenty seconds, then the count raised his pallid face."See," said he, "my dear friend, how God punishes the mostthoughtless and unfeeling men for their indifference, bypresenting dreadful scenes to their view. I, who was lookingon, an eager and curious spectator, -- I, who was watchingthe working of this mournful tragedy, -- I, who like awicked angel was laughing at the evil men committedprotected by secrecy (a secret is easily kept by the richand powerful), I am in my turn bitten by the serpent whosetortuous course I was watching, and bitten to the heart!"

　　Morrel groaned. "Come, come," continued the count,"complaints are unavailing, be a man, be strong, be full ofhope, for I am here and will watch over you." Morrel shookhis head sorrowfully. "I tell you to hope. Do you understandme?" cried Monte Cristo. "Remember that I never uttered afalsehood and am never deceived. It is twelve o'clock,Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon rather thanin the evening, or to-morrow morning. Listen, Morrel -- itis noon; if Valentine is not now dead, she will not die."

　　"How so?" cried Morrel, "when I left her dying?" MonteCristo pressed his hands to his forehead. What was passingin that brain, so loaded with dreadful secrets? What doesthe angel of light or the angel of darkness say to thatmind, at once implacable and generous? God only knows.

　　Monte Cristo raised his head once more, and this time he wascalm as a child awaking from its sleep. "Maximilian," saidhe, "return home. I command you not to stir -- attemptnothing, not to let your countenance betray a thought, and Iwill send you tidings. Go."

　　"Oh, count, you overwhelm me with that coolness. Have you,then, power against death? Are you superhuman? Are you anangel?" And the young man, who had never shrunk from danger,shrank before Monte Cristo with indescribable terror. ButMonte Cristo looked at him with so melancholy and sweet asmile, that Maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes. "Ican do much for you, my friend," replied the count. "Go; Imust be alone." Morrel, subdued by the extraordinaryascendancy Monte Cristo exercised over everything aroundhim, did not endeavor to resist it. He pressed the count'shand and left. He stopped one moment at the door forBaptistin, whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who wasrunning.

　　Meanwhile, Villefort and d'Avrigny had made all possiblehaste, Valentine had not revived from her fainting fit ontheir arrival, and the doctor examined the invalid with allthe care the circumstances demanded, and with an interestwhich the knowledge of the secret intensified twofold.Villefort, closely watching his countenance and his lips,awaited the result of the examination. Noirtier, paler thaneven the young girl, more eager than Villefort for thedecision, was watching also intently and affectionately. Atlast d'Avrigny slowly uttered these words: -- "she is stillalive!"

　　"Still?" cried Villefort; "oh, doctor, what a dreadful wordis that."

　　"Yes," said the physician, "I repeat it; she is still alive,and I am astonished at it."

　　"But is she safe?" asked the father.

　　"Yes, since she lives." At that moment d'Avrigny's glancemet Noirtier's eye. It glistened with such extraordinaryjoy, so rich and full of thought, that the physician wasstruck. He placed the young girl again on the chair, -- herlips were scarcely discernible, they were so pale and white,as well as her whole face, -- and remained motionless,looking at Noirtier, who appeared to anticipate and commendall he did. "Sir," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, "callMademoiselle Valentine's maid, if you please." Villefortwent himself to find her; and d'Avrigny approached Noirtier."Have you something to tell me?" asked he. The old manwinked his eyes expressively, which we may remember was hisonly way of expressing his approval.

　　"Privately?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, I will remain with you." At this moment Villefortreturned, followed by the lady's maid; and after her cameMadame de Villefort.

　　"What is the matter, then, with this dear child? she hasjust left me, and she complained of being indisposed, but Idid not think seriously of it." The young woman with tearsin her eyes and every mark of affection of a true mother,approached Valentine and took her hand. D'Avrigny continuedto look at Noirtier; he saw the eyes of the old man dilateand become round, his cheeks turn pale and tremble; theperspiration stood in drops upon his forehead. "Ah," saidhe, involuntarily following Noirtier's eyes, which werefixed on Madame de Villefort, who repeated, -- "This poorchild would be better in bed. Come, Fanny, we will put herto bed." M. d'Avrigny, who saw that would be a means of hisremaining alone with Noirtier, expressed his opinion that itwas the best thing that could be done; but he forbade thatanything should be given to her except what he ordered.

　　They carried Valentine away; she had revived, but couldscarcely move or speak, so shaken was her frame by theattack. She had, however, just power to give one partinglook to her grandfather, who in losing her seemed to beresigning his very soul. D'Avrigny followed the invalid,wrote a prescription, ordered Villefort to take a cabriolet,go in person to a chemist's to get the prescribed medicine,bring it himself, and wait for him in his daughter's room.Then, having renewed his injunction not to give Valentineanything, he went down again to Noirtier, shut the doorscarefully, and after convincing himself that no one waslistening, -- "Do you," said he, "know anything of thisyoung lady's illness?"

　　"Yes," said the old man.

　　"We have no time to lose; I will question, and do you answerme." Noirtier made a sign that he was ready to answer. "Didyou anticipate the accident which has happened to yourgranddaughter?"

　　"Yes." D'Avrigny reflected a moment; then approachingNoirtier, -- "Pardon what I am going to say," added he, "butno indication should be neglected in this terriblesituation. Did you see poor Barrois die?" Noirtier raisedhis eyes to heaven. "Do you know of what he died!" askedd'Avrigny, placing his hand on Noirtier's shoulder.

　　"Yes," replied the old man.

　　"Do you think he died a natural death?" A sort of smile wasdiscernible on the motionless lips of Noirtier.

　　"Then you have thought that Barrois was poisoned?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Do you think the poison he fell a victim to was intendedfor him?"

　　"No."

　　"Do you think the same hand which unintentionally struckBarrois has now attacked Valentine?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then will she die too?" asked d'Avrigny, fixing hispenetrating gaze on Noirtier. He watched the effect of thisquestion on the old man. "No," replied he with an air oftriumph which would have puzzled the most clever diviner."Then you hope?" said d'Avrigny, with surprise.

　　"Yes."

　　"What do you hope?" The old man made him understand with hiseyes that he could not answer. "Ah, yes, it is true,"murmured d'Avrigny. Then, turning to Noirtier, -- "Do youhope the assassin will be tried?"

　　"No."

　　"Then you hope the poison will take no effect on Valentine?"

　　"Yes."

　　"It is no news to you," added d'Avrigny, "to tell you thatan attempt has been made to poison her?" The old man made asign that he entertained no doubt upon the subject. "Thenhow do you hope Valentine will escape?" Noirtier kept hiseyes steadfastly fixed on the same spot. D'Avrigny followedthe direction and saw that they were fixed on a bottlecontaining the mixture which he took every morning. "Ah,indeed?" said d'Avrigny, struck with a sudden thought, "hasit occurred to you" -- Noirtier did not let him finish."Yes," said he. "To prepare her system to resist poison?"

　　"Yes."

　　"By accustoming her by degrees" --

　　"Yes, yes, yes," said Noirtier, delighted to be understood.

　　"Of course. I had told you that there was brucine in themixture I give you."

　　"Yes."

　　"And by accustoming her to that poison, you have endeavoredto neutralize the effect of a similar poison?" Noirtier'sjoy continued. "And you have succeeded," exclaimedd'Avrigny. "Without that precaution Valentine would havedied before assistance could have been procured. The dosehas been excessive, but she has only been shaken by it; andthis time, at any rate, Valentine will not die." Asuperhuman joy expanded the old man's eyes, which wereraised towards heaven with an expression of infinitegratitude. At this moment Villefort returned. "Here,doctor," said he, "is what you sent me for."

　　"Was this prepared in your presence?"

　　"Yes," replied the procureur.

　　"Have you not let it go out of your hands?"

　　"No." D'Avrigny took the bottle, poured some drops of themixture it contained in the hollow of his hand, andswallowed them. "Well," said he, "let us go to Valentine; Iwill give instructions to every one, and you, M. deVillefort, will yourself see that no one deviates fromthem."

　　At the moment when d'Avrigny was returning to Valentine'sroom, accompanied by Villefort, an Italian priest, ofserious demeanor and calm and firm tone, hired for his usethe house adjoining the hotel of M. de Villefort. No oneknew how the three former tenants of that house left it.About two hours afterwards its foundation was reported to beunsafe; but the report did not prevent the new occupantestablishing himself there with his modest furniture thesame day at five o'clock. The lease was drawn up for three,six, or nine years by the new tenant, who, according to therule of the proprietor, paid six months in advance. This newtenant, who, as we have said, was an Italian, was called IlSignor Giacomo Busoni. Workmen were immediately called in,and that same night the passengers at the end of thefaubourg saw with surprise that carpenters and masons wereoccupied in repairing the lower part of the tottering house.

　　Chapter 95Father and Daughter.

　　We saw in a preceding chapter how Madame Danglars wentformally to announce to Madame de Villefort the approachingmarriage of Eugenie Danglars and M. Andrea Cavalcanti. Thisannouncement, which implied or appeared to imply, theapproval of all the persons concerned in this momentousaffair, had been preceded by a scene to which our readersmust be admitted. We beg them to take one step backward, andto transport themselves, the morning of that day of greatcatastrophes, into the showy, gilded salon we have beforeshown them, and which was the pride of its owner, BaronDanglars. In this room, at about ten o'clock in the morning,the banker himself had been walking to and fro for someminutes thoughtfully and in evident uneasiness, watchingboth doors, and listening to every sound. When his patiencewas exhausted, he called his valet. "Etienne," said he, "seewhy Mademoiselle Eugenie has asked me to meet her in thedrawing-room, and why she makes me wait so long."

　　Having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron becamemore calm; Mademoiselle Danglars had that morning requestedan interview with her father, and had fixed on the gildeddrawing-room as the spot. The singularity of this step, andabove all its formality, had not a little surprised thebanker, who had immediately obeyed his daughter by repairingfirst to the drawing-room. Etienne soon returned from hiserrand. "Mademoiselle's lady's maid says, sir, thatmademoiselle is finishing her toilette, and will be hereshortly."

　　Danglars nodded, to signify that he was satisfied. To theworld and to his servants Danglars assumed the character ofthe good-natured man and the indulgent father. This was oneof his parts in the popular comedy he was performing, -- amake-up he had adopted and which suited him about as well asthe masks worn on the classic stage by paternal actors, whoseen from one side, were the image of geniality, and fromthe other showed lips drawn down in chronic ill-temper. Letus hasten to say that in private the genial side descendedto the level of the other, so that generally the indulgentman disappeared to give place to the brutal husband anddomineering father. "Why the devil does that foolish girl,who pretends to wish to speak to me, not come into my study?and why on earth does she want to speak to me at all?"

　　He was turning this thought over in his brain for thetwentieth time, when the door opened and Eugenie appeared,attired in a figured black satin dress, her hair dressed andgloves on, as if she were going to the Italian Opera. "Well,Eugenie, what is it you want with me? and why in this solemndrawing-room when the study is so comfortable?"

　　"I quite understand why you ask, sir," said Eugenie, makinga sign that her father might be seated, "and in fact yourtwo questions suggest fully the theme of our conversation. Iwill answer them both, and contrary to the usual method, thelast first, because it is the least difficult. I have chosenthe drawing-room, sir, as our place of meeting, in order toavoid the disagreeable impressions and influences of abanker's study. Those gilded cashbooks, drawers locked likegates of fortresses, heaps of bank-bills, come from I knownot where, and the quantities of letters from England,Holland, Spain, India, China, and Peru, have generally astrange influence on a father's mind, and make him forgetthat there is in the world an interest greater and moresacred than the good opinion of his correspondents. I have,therefore, chosen this drawing-room, where you see, smilingand happy in their magnificent frames, your portrait, mine,my mother's, and all sorts of rural landscapes and touchingpastorals. I rely much on external impressions; perhaps,with regard to you, they are immaterial, but I should be noartist if I had not some fancies."

　　"Very well," replied M. Danglars, who had listened to allthis preamble with imperturbable coolness, but withoutunderstanding a word, since like every man burdened withthoughts of the past, he was occupied with seeking thethread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.

　　"There is, then, the second point cleared up, or nearly so,"said Eugenie, without the least confusion, and with thatmasculine pointedness which distinguished her gesture andher language; "and you appear satisfied with theexplanation. Now, let us return to the first. You ask me whyI have requested this interview; I will tell you in twowords, sir; I will not marry count Andrea Cavalcanti."

　　Danglars leaped from his chair and raised his eyes and armstowards heaven.

　　"Yes, indeed, sir," continued Eugenie, still quite calm;"you are astonished, I see; for since this little affairbegan, I have not manifested the slightest opposition, andyet I am always sure, when the opportunity arrives, tooppose a determined and absolute will to people who have notconsulted me, and things which displease me. However, thistime, my tranquillity, or passiveness as philosophers say,proceeded from another source; it proceeded from a wish,like a submissive and devoted daughter" (a slight smile wasobservable on the purple lips of the young girl), "topractice obedience."

　　"Well?" asked Danglars.

　　"Well, sir," replied Eugenie, "I have tried to the very lastand now that the moment has come, I feel in spite of all myefforts that it is impossible."

　　"But," said Danglars, whose weak mind was at first quiteoverwhelmed with the weight of this pitiless logic, markingevident premeditation and force of will, "what is yourreason for this refusal, Eugenie? what reason do youassign?"

　　"My reason?" replied the young girl. "Well, it is not thatthe man is more ugly, more foolish, or more disagreeablethan any other; no, M. Andrea Cavalcanti may appear to thosewho look at men's faces and figures as a very good specimenof his kind. It is not, either, that my heart is lesstouched by him than any other; that would be a schoolgirl'sreason, which I consider quite beneath me. I actually loveno one, sir; you know it, do you not? I do not then see why,without real necessity, I should encumber my life with aperpetual companion. Has not some sage said, `Nothing toomuch'? and another, `I carry all my effects with me'? I havebeen taught these two aphorisms in Latin and in Greek; oneis, I believe, from Phaedrus, and the other from Bias. Well,my dear father, in the shipwreck of life -- for life is aneternal shipwreck of our hopes -- I cast into the sea myuseless encumbrance, that is all, and I remain with my ownwill, disposed to live perfectly alone, and consequentlyperfectly free."

　　"Unhappy girl, unhappy girl!" murmured Danglars, turningpale, for he knew from long experience the solidity of theobstacle he had so suddenly encountered.

　　"Unhappy girl," replied Eugenie, "unhappy girl, do you say,sir? No, indeed; the exclamation appears quite theatricaland affected. Happy, on the contrary, for what am I in wantof! The world calls me beautiful. It is something to be wellreceived. I like a favorable reception; it expands thecountenance, and those around me do not then appear so ugly.I possess a share of wit, and a certain relativesensibility, which enables me to draw from life in general,for the support of mine, all I meet with that is good, likethe monkey who cracks the nut to get at its contents. I amrich, for you have one of the first fortunes in France. I amyour only daughter, and you are not so exacting as thefathers of the Porte Saint-Martin and Gaiete, who disinherittheir daughters for not giving them grandchildren. Besides,the provident law has deprived you of the power todisinherit me, at least entirely, as it has also of thepower to compel me to marry Monsieur This or Monsieur That.And so -- being, beautiful, witty, somewhat talented, as thecomic operas say, and rich -- and that is happiness, sir --why do you call me unhappy?"

　　Danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even toinsolence, could not entirely repress his brutal feelings,but they betrayed themselves only by an exclamation. Underthe fixed and inquiring gaze levelled at him from underthose beautiful black eyebrows, he prudently turned away,and calmed himself immediately, daunted by the power of aresolute mind. "Truly, my daughter," replied he with asmile, "you are all you boast of being, excepting one thing;I will not too hastily tell you which, but would ratherleave you to guess it." Eugenie looked at Danglars, muchsurprised that one flower of her crown of pride, with whichshe had so superbly decked herself, should be disputed. "Mydaughter," continued the banker, "you have perfectlyexplained to me the sentiments which influence a girl likeyou, who is determined she will not marry; now it remainsfor me to tell you the motives of a father like me, who hasdecided that his daughter shall marry." Eugenie bowed, notas a submissive daughter, but as an adversary prepared for adiscussion.

　　"My daughter," continued Danglars, "when a father asks hisdaughter to choose a husband, he has always some reason forwishing her to marry. Some are affected with the mania ofwhich you spoke just now, that of living again in theirgrandchildren. This is not my weakness, I tell you at once;family joys have no charm for me. I may acknowledge this toa daughter whom I know to be philosophical enough tounderstand my indifference, and not to impute it to me as acrime."

　　"This is not to the purpose," said Eugenie; "let us speakcandidly, sir; I admire candor."

　　"Oh," said Danglars, "I can, when circumstances render itdesirable, adopt your system, although it may not be mygeneral practice. I will therefore proceed. I have proposedto you to marry, not for your sake, for indeed I did notthink of you in the least at the moment (you admire candor,and will now be satisfied, I hope); but because it suited meto marry you as soon as possible, on account of certaincommercial speculations I am desirous of entering into."Eugenie became uneasy.

　　"It is just as I tell you, I assure you, and you must not beangry with me, for you have sought this disclosure. I do notwillingly enter into arithmetical explanations with anartist like you, who fears to enter my study lest she shouldimbibe disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions andsensations. But in that same banker's study, where you verywillingly presented yourself yesterday to ask for thethousand francs I give you monthly for pocket-money, youmust know, my dear young lady, that many things may belearned, useful even to a girl who will not marry. There onemay learn, for instance, what, out of regard to your nervoussusceptibility, I will inform you of in the drawing-room,namely, that the credit of a banker is his physical andmoral life; that credit sustains him as breath animates thebody; and M. de Monte Cristo once gave me a lecture on thatsubject, which I have never forgotten. There we may learnthat as credit sinks, the body becomes a corpse, and this iswhat must happen very soon to the banker who is proud to ownso good a logician as you for his daughter." But Eugenie,instead of stooping, drew herself up under the blow."Ruined?" said she.

　　"Exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what I mean," saidDanglars, almost digging his nails into his breast, while hepreserved on his harsh features the smile of the heartlessthough clever man; "ruined -- yes, that is it."

　　"Ah!" said Eugenie.

　　"Yes, ruined! Now it is revealed, this secret so full ofhorror, as the tragic poet says. Now, my daughter, learnfrom my lips how you may alleviate this misfortune, so faras it will affect you."

　　"Oh," cried Eugenie, "you are a bad physiognomist, if youimagine I deplore on my own account the catastrophe of whichyou warn me. I ruined? and what will that signify to me?Have I not my talent left? Can I not, like Pasta, Malibran,Grisi, acquire for myself what you would never have givenme, whatever might have been your fortune, a hundred or ahundred and fifty thousand livres per annum, for which Ishall be indebted to no one but myself; and which, insteadof being given as you gave me those poor twelve thousandfrancs, with sour looks and reproaches for my prodigality,will be accompanied with acclamations, with bravos, and withflowers? And if I do not possess that talent, which yoursmiles prove to me you doubt, should I not still have thatardent love of independence, which will be a substitute forwealth, and which in my mind supersedes even the instinct ofself-preservation? No, I grieve not on my own account, Ishall always find a resource; my books, my pencils, mypiano, all the things which cost but little, and which Ishall be able to procure, will remain my own.

　　"Do you think that I sorrow for Madame Danglars? Undeceiveyourself again; either I am greatly mistaken, or she hasprovided against the catastrophe which threatens you, and,which will pass over without affecting her. She has takencare for herself, -- at least I hope so, -- for herattention has not been diverted from her projects bywatching over me. She has fostered my independence byprofessedly indulging my love for liberty. Oh, no, sir; frommy childhood I have seen too much, and understood too much,of what has passed around me, for misfortune to have anundue power over me. From my earliest recollections, I havebeen beloved by no one -- so much the worse; that hasnaturally led me to love no one -- so much the better -- nowyou have my profession of faith."

　　"Then," said Danglars, pale with anger, which was not at alldue to offended paternal love, -- "then, mademoiselle, youpersist in your determination to accelerate my ruin?"

　　"Your ruin? I accelerate your ruin? What do you mean? I donot understand you."

　　"So much the better, I have a ray of hope left; listen."

　　"I am all attention," said Eugenie, looking so earnestly ather father that it was an effort for the latter to endureher unrelenting gaze.

　　"M. Cavalcanti," continued Danglars, "is about to marry you,and will place in my hands his fortune, amounting to threemillion livres."

　　"That is admirable!" said Eugenie with sovereign contempt,smoothing her gloves out one upon the other.

　　"You think I shall deprive you of those three millions,"said Danglars; "but do not fear it. They are destined toproduce at least ten. I and a brother banker have obtained agrant of a railway, the only industrial enterprise which inthese days promises to make good the fabulous prospects thatLaw once held out to the eternally deluded Parisians, in thefantastic Mississippi scheme. As I look at it, a millionthpart of a railway is worth fully as much as an acre of wasteland on the banks of the Ohio. We make in our case adeposit, on a mortgage, which is an advance, as you see,since we gain at least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a hundredlivres' worth of iron in exchange for our money. Well,within a week I am to deposit four millions for my share;the four millions, I promise you, will produce ten ortwelve."

　　"But during my visit to you the day before yesterday, sir,which you appear to recollect so well," replied Eugenie, "Isaw you arranging a deposit -- is not that the term? -- offive millions and a half; you even pointed it out to me intwo drafts on the treasury, and you were astonished that sovaluable a paper did not dazzle my eyes like lightning."

　　"Yes, but those five millions and a half are not mine, andare only a proof of the great confidence placed in me; mytitle of popular banker has gained me the confidence ofcharitable institutions, and the five millions and a halfbelong to them; at any other time I should not havehesitated to make use of them, but the great losses I haverecently sustained are well known, and, as I told you, mycredit is rather shaken. That deposit may be at any momentwithdrawn, and if I had employed it for another purpose, Ishould bring on me a disgraceful bankruptcy. I do notdespise bankruptcies, believe me, but they must be thosewhich enrich, not those which ruin. Now, if you marry M.Cavalcanti, and I get the three millions, or even if it isthought I am going to get them, my credit will be restored,and my fortune, which for the last month or two has beenswallowed up in gulfs which have been opened in my path byan inconceivable fatality, will revive. Do you understandme?"

　　"Perfectly; you pledge me for three millions, do you not?"

　　"The greater the amount, the more flattering it is to you;it gives you an idea of your value."

　　"Thank you. One word more, sir; do you promise me to makewhat use you can of the report of the fortune M. Cavalcantiwill bring without touching the money? This is no act ofselfishness, but of delicacy. I am willing to help rebuildyour fortune, but I will not be an accomplice in the ruin ofothers."

　　"But since I tell you," cried Danglars, "that with thesethree million" --

　　"Do you expect to recover your position, sir, withouttouching those three million?"

　　"I hope so, if the marriage should take place and confirm mycredit."

　　"Shall you be able to pay M. Cavalcanti the five hundredthousand francs you promise for my dowry?"

　　"He shall receive then on returning from the mayor's."*

　　* The performance of the civil marriage.

　　"Very well!"

　　"What next? what more do you want?"

　　"I wish to know if, in demanding my signature, you leave meentirely free in my person?"

　　"Absolutely."

　　"Then, as I said before, sir, -- very well; I am ready tomarry M. Cavalcanti."

　　"But what are you up to?"

　　"Ah, that is my affair. What advantage should I have overyou, if knowing your secret I were to tell you mine?"Danglars bit his lips. "Then," said he, "you are ready topay the official visits, which are absolutelyindispensable?"

　　"Yes," replied Eugenie.

　　"And to sign the contract in three days?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Then, in my turn, I also say, very well!" Danglars pressedhis daughter's hand in his. But, extraordinary to relate,the father did not say, "Thank you, my child," nor did thedaughter smile at her father. "Is the conference ended?"asked Eugenie, rising. Danglars motioned that he had nothingmore to say. Five minutes afterwards the piano resounded tothe touch of Mademoiselle d'Armilly's fingers, andMademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio's malediction onDesdemona. At the end of the piece Etienne entered, andannounced to Eugenie that the horses were in the carriage,and that the baroness was waiting for her to pay her visits.We have seen them at Villefort's; they proceeded then ontheir course.

　　Chapter 96The Contract.

　　Three days after the scene we have just described, namelytowards five o'clock in the afternoon of the day fixed forthe signature of the contract between Mademoiselle EugenieDanglars and Andrea Cavalcanti, -- whom the banker persistedin calling prince, -- a fresh breeze was stirring the leavesin the little garden in front of the Count of Monte Cristo'shouse, and the count was preparing to go out. While hishorses were impatiently pawing the ground, -- held in by thecoachman, who had been seated a quarter of an hour on hisbox, -- the elegant phaeton with which we are familiarrapidly turned the angle of the entrance-gate, and cast outon the doorsteps M. Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked up and gayas if he were going to marry a princess. He inquired afterthe count with his usual familiarity, and ascending lightlyto the second story met him at the top of the stairs. Thecount stopped on seeing the young man. As for Andrea, he waslaunched, and when he was once launched nothing stopped him."Ah, good morning, my dear count," said he. "Ah, M. Andrea,"said the latter, with his half-jesting tone; "how do youdo."

　　"Charmingly, as you see. I am come to talk to you about athousand things; but, first tell me, were you going out orjust returned?"

　　"I was going out, sir."

　　"Then, in order not to hinder you, I will get up with you ifyou please in your carriage, and Tom shall follow with myphaeton in tow."

　　"No," said the count, with an imperceptible smile ofcontempt, for he had no wish to be seen in the young man'ssociety, -- "no; I prefer listening to you here, my dear M.Andrea; we can chat better in-doors, and there is nocoachman to overhear our conversation." The count returnedto a small drawing-room on the first floor, sat down, andcrossing his legs motioned to the young man to take a seatalso. Andrea assumed his gayest manner. "You know, my dearcount," said he, "the ceremony is to take place thisevening. At nine o'clock the contract is to be signed at myfather-in-law's."

　　"Ah, indeed?" said Monte Cristo.

　　"What; is it news to you? Has not M. Danglars informed youof the ceremony?"

　　"Oh, yes," said the count; "I received a letter from himyesterday, but I do not think the hour was mentioned."

　　"Possibly my father-in-law trusted to its generalnotoriety."

　　"Well," said Monte Cristo, "you are fortunate, M.Cavalcanti; it is a most suitable alliance you arecontracting, and Mademoiselle Danglars is a handsome girl."

　　"Yes, indeed she is," replied Cavalcanti, in a very modesttone.

　　"Above all, she is very rich, -- at least, I believe so,"said Monte Cristo.

　　"Very rich, do you think?" replied the young man.

　　"Doubtless; it is said M. Danglars conceals at least half ofhis fortune."

　　"And he acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions," saidAndrea with a look sparkling with joy.

　　"Without reckoning," added Monte Cristo, "that he is on theeve of entering into a sort of speculation already in voguein the United States and in England, but quite novel inFrance."

　　"Yes, yes, I know what you mean, -- the railway, of which hehas obtained the grant, is it not?"

　　"Precisely; it is generally believed he will gain tenmillions by that affair."

　　"Ten millions! Do you think so? It is magnificent!" saidCavalcanti, who was quite confounded at the metallic soundof these golden words. "Without reckoning," replied MonteCristo, "that all his fortune will come to you, and justlytoo, since Mademoiselle Danglars is an only daughter.Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, isalmost equal to that of your betrothed. But enough of moneymatters. Do you know, M. Andrea, I think you have managedthis affair rather skilfully?"

　　"Not badly, by any means," said the young man; "I was bornfor a diplomatist."

　　"Well, you must become a diplomatist; diplomacy, you know,is something that is not to be acquired; it is instinctive.Have you lost your heart?"

　　"Indeed, I fear it," replied Andrea, in the tone in which hehad heard Dorante or Valere reply to Alceste* at the TheatreFrancais.

　　"Is your love returned?"

　　* In Moliere's comedy, Le Misanthrope.

　　"I suppose so," said Andrea with a triumphant smile, "sinceI am accepted. But I must not forget one grand point."

　　"Which?"

　　"That I have been singularly assisted."

　　"Nonsense."

　　"I have, indeed."

　　"By circumstances?"

　　"No; by you."

　　"By me? Not at all, prince," said Monte Cristo laying amarked stress on the title, "what have I done for you? Arenot your name, your social position, and your meritsufficient?"

　　"No," said Andrea, -- "no; it is useless for you to say so,count. I maintain that the position of a man like you hasdone more than my name, my social position, and my merit."

　　"You are completely mistaken, sir," said Monte Cristocoldly, who felt the perfidious manoeuvre of the young man,and understood the bearing of his words; "you only acquiredmy protection after the influence and fortune of your fatherhad been ascertained; for, after all, who procured for me,who had never seen either you or your illustrious father,the pleasure of your acquaintance? -- two of my goodfriends, Lord Wilmore and the Abbe Busoni. What encouragedme not to become your surety, but to patronize you? -- yourfather's name, so well known in Italy and so highly honored.Personally, I do not know you." This calm tone and perfectease made Andrea feel that he was, for the moment,restrained by a more muscular hand than his own, and thatthe restraint could not be easily broken through.

　　"Oh, then my father has really a very large fortune, count?"

　　"It appears so, sir," replied Monte Cristo.

　　"Do you know if the marriage settlement he promised me hascome?"

　　"I have been advised of it."

　　"But the three millions?"

　　"The three millions are probably on the road."

　　"Then I shall really have them?"

　　"Oh, well," said the count, "I do not think you have yetknown the want of money." Andrea was so surprised that hepondered the matter for a moment. Then, arousing from hisrevery, -- "Now, sir, I have one request to make to you,which you will understand, even if it should be disagreeableto you."

　　"Proceed," said Monte Cristo.

　　"I have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune,with many noted persons, and have, at least for the moment,a crowd of friends. But marrying, as I am about to do,before all Paris, I ought to be supported by an illustriousname, and in the absence of the paternal hand some powerfulone ought to lead me to the altar; now, my father is notcoming to Paris, is he? He is old, covered with wounds, andsuffers dreadfully, he says, in travelling."

　　"Indeed?"

　　"Well, I am come to ask a favor of you."

　　"Of me?"

　　"Yes, of you."

　　"And pray what may it be?"

　　"Well, to take his part."

　　"Ah, my dear sir! What? -- after the varied relations I havehad the happiness to sustain towards you, can it be that youknow me so little as to ask such a thing? Ask me to lend youhalf a million and, although such a loan is somewhat rare,on my honor, you would annoy me less! Know, then, what Ithought I had already told you, that in participation inthis world's affairs, more especially in their moralaspects, the Count of Monte Cristo has never ceased toentertain the scruples and even the superstitions of theEast. I, who have a seraglio at Cairo, one at Smyrna, andone at Constantinople, preside at a wedding? -- never!"

　　"Then you refuse me?"

　　"Decidedly; and were you my son or my brother I would refuseyou in the same way."

　　"But what must be done?" said Andrea, disappointed.

　　"You said just now that you had a hundred friends."

　　"Very true, but you introduced me at M. Danglars'."

　　"Not at all! Let us recall the exact facts. You met him at adinner party at my house, and you introduced yourself at hishouse; that is a totally different affair."

　　"Yes, but, by my marriage, you have forwarded that."

　　"I? -- not in the least, I beg you to believe. Recollectwhat I told you when you asked me to propose you. `Oh, Inever make matches, my dear prince, it is my settledprinciple.'" Andrea bit his lips.

　　"But, at least, you will be there?"

　　"Will all Paris be there?"

　　"Oh, certainly."

　　"Well, like all Paris, I shall be there too," said thecount.

　　"And will you sign the contract?"

　　"I see no objection to that; my scruples do not go thusfar."

　　"Well, since you will grant me no more, I must be contentwith what you give me. But one word more, count."

　　"What is it?"

　　"Advice."

　　"Be careful; advice is worse than a service."

　　"Oh, you can give me this without compromising yourself."

　　"Tell me what it is."

　　"Is my wife's fortune five hundred thousand livres?"

　　"That is the sum M. Danglars himself announced."

　　"Must I receive it, or leave it in the hands of the notary?"

　　"This is the way such affairs are generally arranged when itis wished to do them stylishly: Your two solicitors appointa meeting, when the contract is signed, for the next or thefollowing day; then they exchange the two portions, forwhich they each give a receipt; then, when the marriage iscelebrated, they place the amount at your disposal as thechief member of the alliance."

　　"Because," said Andrea, with a certain ill-concealeduneasiness, "I thought I heard my father-in-law say that heintended embarking our property in that famous railwayaffair of which you spoke just now."

　　"Well," replied Monte Cristo, "it will be the way, everybodysays, of trebling your fortune in twelve months. BaronDanglars is a good father, and knows how to calculate."

　　"In that case," said Andrea, "everything is all right,excepting your refusal, which quite grieves me."

　　"You must attribute it only to natural scruples undersimilar circumstances."

　　"Well," said Andrea, "let it be as you wish. This evening,then, at nine o'clock."

　　"Adieu till then." Notwithstanding a slight resistance onthe part of Monte Cristo, whose lips turned pale, but whopreserved his ceremonious smile, Andrea seized the count'shand, pressed it, jumped into his phaeton, and disappeared.

　　The four or five remaining hours before nine o'clockarrived, Andrea employed in riding, paying visits, --designed to induce those of whom he had spoken to appear atthe banker's in their gayest equipages, -- dazzling them bypromises of shares in schemes which have since turned everybrain, and in which Danglars was just taking the initiative.In fact, at half-past eight in the evening the grand salon,the gallery adjoining, and the three other drawing-rooms onthe same floor, were filled with a perfumed crowd, whosympathized but little in the event, but who allparticipated in that love of being present wherever there isanything fresh to be seen. An Academician would say that theentertainments of the fashionable world are collections offlowers which attract inconstant butterflies, famished bees,and buzzing drones.

　　No one could deny that the rooms were splendidlyilluminated; the light streamed forth on the gilt mouldingsand the silk hangings; and all the bad taste of decorations,which had only their richness to boast of, shone in itssplendor. Mademoiselle Eugenie was dressed with elegantsimplicity in a figured white silk dress, and a white rosehalf concealed in her jet black hair was her only ornament,unaccompanied by a single jewel. Her eyes, however, betrayedthat perfect confidence which contradicted the girlishsimplicity of this modest attire. Madame Danglars waschatting at a short distance with Debray, Beauchamp, andChateau-Renaud.

　　Debray was admitted to the house for this grand ceremony,but on the same plane with every one else, and without anyparticular privilege. M. Danglars, surrounded by deputiesand men connected with the revenue, was explaining a newtheory of taxation which he intended to adopt when thecourse of events had compelled the government to call himinto the ministry. Andrea, on whose arm hung one of the mostconsummate dandies of the opera, was explaining to himrather cleverly, since he was obliged to be bold to appearat ease, his future projects, and the new luxuries he meantto introduce to Parisian fashions with his hundred andseventy-five thousand livres per annum.

　　The crowd moved to and fro in the rooms like an ebb and flowof turquoises, rubies, emeralds, opals, and diamonds. Asusual, the oldest women were the most decorated, and theugliest the most conspicuous. If there was a beautiful lily,or a sweet rose, you had to search for it, concealed in somecorner behind a mother with a turban, or an aunt with a birdof paradise.

　　At each moment, in the midst of the crowd, the buzzing, andthe laughter, the door-keeper's voice was heard announcingsome name well known in the financial department, respectedin the army, or illustrious in the literary world, and whichwas acknowledged by a slight movement in the differentgroups. But for one whose privilege it was to agitate thatocean of human waves, how many were received with a look ofindifference or a sneer of disdain! At the moment when thehand of the massive time-piece, representing Endymionasleep, pointed to nine on its golden face, and the hammer,the faithful type of mechanical thought, struck nine times,the name of the Count of Monte Cristo resounded in its turn,and as if by an electric shock all the assembly turnedtowards the door.

　　The count was dressed in black and with his habitualsimplicity; his white waistcoat displayed his expansivenoble chest and his black stock was singularly noticeablebecause of its contrast with the deadly paleness of hisface. His only jewellery was a chain, so fine that theslender gold thread was scarcely perceptible on his whitewaistcoat. A circle was immediately formed around the door.The count perceived at one glance Madame Danglars at one endof the drawing-room, M. Danglars at the other, and Eugeniein front of him. He first advanced towards the baroness, whowas chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone,Valentine being still an invalid; and without turning aside,so clear was the road left for him, he passed from thebaroness to Eugenie, whom he complimented in such rapid andmeasured terms, that the proud artist was quite struck. Nearher was Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly, who thanked the countfor the letters of introduction he had so kindly given herfor Italy, which she intended immediately to make use of. Onleaving these ladies he found himself with Danglars, who hadadvanced to meet him.

　　Having accomplished these three social duties, Monte Cristostopped, looking around him with that expression peculiar toa certain class, which seems to say, "I have done my duty,now let others do theirs." Andrea, who was in an adjoiningroom, had shared in the sensation caused by the arrival ofMonte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects tothe count. He found him completely surrounded; all wereeager to speak to him, as is always the case with thosewhose words are few and weighty. The solicitors arrived atthis moment and arranged their scrawled papers on the velvetcloth embroidered with gold which covered the table preparedfor the signature; it was a gilt table supported on lions'claws. One of the notaries sat down, the other remainedstanding. They were about to proceed to the reading of thecontract, which half Paris assembled was to sign. All tooktheir places, or rather the ladies formed a circle, whilethe gentlemen (more indifferent to the restraints of whatBoileau calls the "energetic style") commented on thefeverish agitation of Andrea, on M. Danglars' rivetedattention, Eugenie's composure, and the light and sprightlymanner in which the baroness treated this important affair.

　　The contract was read during a profound silence. But as soonas it was finished, the buzz was redoubled through all thedrawing-rooms; the brilliant sums, the rolling millionswhich were to be at the command of the two young people, andwhich crowned the display of the wedding presents and theyoung lady's diamonds, which had been made in a roomentirely appropriated for that purpose, had exercised to thefull their delusions over the envious assembly. MademoiselleDanglars' charms were heightened in the opinion of the youngmen, and for the moment seemed to outvie the sun insplendor. As for the ladies, it is needless to say thatwhile they coveted the millions, they thought they did notneed them for themselves, as they were beautiful enoughwithout them. Andrea, surrounded by his friends,complimented, flattered, beginning to believe in the realityof his dream, was almost bewildered. The notary solemnlytook the pen, flourished it above his head, and said,"Gentlemen, we are about to sign the contract."

　　The baron was to sign first, then the representative of M.Cavalcanti, senior, then the baroness, afterwards the"future couple," as they are styled in the abominablephraseology of legal documents. The baron took the pen andsigned, then the representative. The baroness approached,leaning on Madame de Villefort's arm. "My dear," said she,as she took the pen, "is it not vexatious? An unexpectedincident, in the affair of murder and theft at the Count ofMonte Cristo's, in which he nearly fell a victim, deprivesus of the pleasure of seeing M. de Villefort."

　　"Indeed?" said M. Danglars, in the same tone in which hewould have said, "Oh, well, what do I care?"

　　"As a matter of fact," said Monte Cristo, approaching, "I ammuch afraid that I am the involuntary cause of his absence."

　　"What, you, count?" said Madame Danglars, signing; "if youare, take care, for I shall never forgive you." Andreapricked up his ears.

　　"But it is not my fault, as I shall endeavor to prove."Every one listened eagerly; Monte Cristo who so rarelyopened his lips, was about to speak. "You remember," saidthe count, during the most profound silence, "that theunhappy wretch who came to rob me died at my house; thesupposition is that he was stabbed by his accomplice, onattempting to leave it."

　　"Yes," said Danglars.

　　"In order that his wounds might be examined he wasundressed, and his clothes were thrown into a corner, wherethe police picked them up, with the exception of thewaistcoat, which they overlooked." Andrea turned pale, anddrew towards the door; he saw a cloud rising in the horizon,which appeared to forebode a coming storm.

　　"Well, this waistcoat was discovered to-day, covered withblood, and with a hole over the heart." The ladies screamed,and two or three prepared to faint. "It was brought to me.No one could guess what the dirty rag could be; I alonesuspected that it was the waistcoat of the murdered man. Myvalet, in examining this mournful relic, felt a paper in thepocket and drew it out; it was a letter addressed to you,baron."

　　"To me?" cried Danglars.

　　"Yes, indeed, to you; I succeeded in deciphering your nameunder the blood with which the letter was stained," repliedMonte Cristo, amid the general outburst of amazement.

　　"But," asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband withuneasiness, "how could that prevent M. de Villefort" --

　　"In this simple way, madame," replied Monte Cristo; "thewaistcoat and the letter were both what is termedcircumstantial evidence; I therefore sent them to the king'sattorney. You understand, my dear baron, that legal methodsare the safest in criminal cases; it was, perhaps, some plotagainst you." Andrea looked steadily at Monte Cristo anddisappeared in the second drawing-room.

　　"Possibly," said Danglars; "was not this murdered man an oldgalley-slave?"

　　"Yes," replied the count; "a felon named Caderousse."Danglars turned slightly pale; Andrea reached the anteroombeyond the little drawing-room.

　　"But go on signing," said Monte Cristo; "I perceive that mystory has caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologizeto you, baroness, and to Mademoiselle Danglars." Thebaroness, who had signed, returned the pen to the notary."Prince Cavalcanti," said the latter; "Prince Cavalcanti,where are you?"

　　"Andrea, Andrea," repeated several young people, who werealready on sufficiently intimate terms with him to call himby his Christian name.

　　"Call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign,"cried Danglars to one of the floorkeepers.

　　But at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarminto the principal salon as if some frightful monster hadentered the apartments, quaerens quem devoret. There was,indeed, reason to retreat, to be alarmed, and to scream. Anofficer was placing two soldiers at the door of eachdrawing-room, and was advancing towards Danglars, precededby a commissary of police, girded with his scarf. MadameDanglars uttered a scream and fainted. Danglars, who thoughthimself threatened (certain consciences are never calm), --Danglars even before his guests showed a countenance ofabject terror.

　　"What is the matter, sir?" asked Monte Cristo, advancing tomeet the commissioner.

　　"Which of you gentlemen," asked the magistrate, withoutreplying to the count, "answers to the name of AndreaCavalcanti?" A cry of astonishment was heard from all partsof the room. They searched; they questioned. "But who thenis Andrea Cavalcanti?" asked Danglars in amazement.

　　"A galley-slave, escaped from confinement at Toulon."

　　"And what crime has he committed?"

　　"He is accused," said the commissary with his inflexiblevoice, "of having assassinated the man named Caderousse, hisformer companion in prison, at the moment he was making hisescape from the house of the Count of Monte Cristo." MonteCristo cast a rapid glance around him. Andrea was gone.

　　Chapter 97The Departure for Belgium.

　　A few minutes after the scene of confusion produced in thesalons of M. Danglars by the unexpected appearance of thebrigade of soldiers, and by the disclosure which hadfollowed, the mansion was deserted with as much rapidity asif a case of plague or of cholera morbus had broken outamong the guests. In a few minutes, through all the doors,down all the staircases, by every exit, every one hastenedto retire, or rather to fly; for it was a situation wherethe ordinary condolences, -- which even the best friends areso eager to offer in great catastrophes, -- were seen to beutterly futile. There remained in the banker's house onlyDanglars, closeted in his study, and making his statement tothe officer of gendarmes; Madame Danglars, terrified, in theboudoir with which we are acquainted; and Eugenie, who withhaughty air and disdainful lip had retired to her room withher inseparable companion, Mademoiselle Louise d'Armilly. Asfor the numerous servants (more numerous that evening thanusual, for their number was augmented by cooks and butlersfrom the Cafe de Paris), venting on their employers theiranger at what they termed the insult to which they had beensubjected, they collected in groups in the hall, in thekitchens, or in their rooms, thinking very little of theirduty, which was thus naturally interrupted. Of all thishousehold, only two persons deserve our notice; these areMademoiselle Eugenie Danglars and Mademoiselle Louised'Armilly.

　　The betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air,disdainful lip, and the demeanor of an outraged queen,followed by her companion, who was paler and more disturbedthan herself. On reaching her room Eugenie locked her door,while Louise fell on a chair. "Ah, what a dreadful thing,"said the young musician; "who would have suspected it? M.Andrea Cavalcanti a murderer -- a galley-slave escaped -- aconvict!" An ironical smile curled the lip of Eugenie. "Intruth I was fated," said she. "I escaped the Morcerf only tofall into the Cavalcanti."

　　"Oh, do not confound the two, Eugenie."

　　"Hold your tongue! The men are all infamous, and I am happyto be able now to do more than detest them -- I despisethem."

　　"What shall we do?" asked Louise.

　　"What shall we do?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Why, the same we had intended doing three days since -- setoff."

　　"What? -- although you are not now going to be married, youintend still" --

　　"Listen, Louise. I hate this life of the fashionable world,always ordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper. WhatI have always wished for, desired, and coveted, is the lifeof an artist, free and independent, relying only on my ownresources, and accountable only to myself. Remain here? Whatfor? -- that they may try, a month hence, to marry me again;and to whom? -- M. Debray, perhaps, as it was once proposed.No, Louise, no! This evening's adventure will serve for myexcuse. I did not seek one, I did not ask for one. God sendsme this, and I hail it joyfully!"

　　"How strong and courageous you are!" said the fair, frailgirl to her brunette companion.

　　"Did you not yet know me? Come, Louise, let us talk of ouraffairs. The post-chaise" --

　　"Was happily bought three days since."

　　"Have you had it sent where we are to go for it?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Our passport?"

　　"Here it is."

　　And Eugenie, with her usual precision, opened a printedpaper, and read, --

　　"M. Leon d'Armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist;hair black, eyes black; travelling with his sister."

　　"Capital! How did you get this passport?"

　　"When I went to ask M. de Monte Cristo for letters to thedirectors of the theatres at Rome and Naples, I expressed myfears of travelling as a woman; he perfectly understoodthem, and undertook to procure for me a man's passport, andtwo days after I received this, to which I have added withmy own hand, `travelling with his sister.'"

　　"Well," said Eugenie cheerfully, "we have then only to packup our trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing ofthe contract, instead of the evening of the wedding -- thatis all."

　　"But consider the matter seriously, Eugenie!"

　　"Oh, I am done with considering! I am tired of hearing onlyof market reports, of the end of the month, of the rise andfall of Spanish funds, of Haitian bonds. Instead of that,Louise -- do you understand? -- air, liberty, melody ofbirds, plains of Lombardy, Venetian canals, Roman palaces,the Bay of Naples. How much have we, Louise?" The young girlto whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaidsecretary a small portfolio with a lock, in which shecounted twenty-three bank-notes.

　　"Twenty-three thousand francs," I said she.

　　"And as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels,"said Eugenie. "We are rich. With forty-five thousand francswe can live like princesses for two years, and comfortablyfor four; but before six months -- you with your music, andI with my voice -- we shall double our capital. Come, youshall take charge of the money, I of the jewel-box; so thatif one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, theother would still have hers left. Now, the portmanteau --let us make haste -- the portmanteau!"

　　"Stop!" said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars'door.

　　"What do you fear?"

　　"That we may be discovered."

　　"The door is locked."

　　"They may tell us to open it."

　　"They may if they like, but we will not."

　　"You are a perfect Amazon, Eugenie!" And the two young girlsbegan to heap into a trunk all the things they thought theyshould require. "There now," said Eugenie, "while I changemy costume do you lock the portmanteau." Louise pressed withall the strength of her little hands on the top of theportmanteau. "But I cannot," said she; "I am not strongenough; do you shut it."

　　"Ah, you do well to ask," said Eugenie, laughing; "I forgotthat I was Hercules, and you only the pale Omphale!" And theyoung girl, kneeling on the top, pressed the two parts ofthe portmanteau together, and Mademoiselle d'Armilly passedthe bolt of the padlock through. When this was done, Eugenieopened a drawer, of which she kept the key, and took from ita wadded violet silk travelling cloak. "Here," said she,"you see I have thought of everything; with this cloak youwill not be cold."

　　"But you?"

　　"Oh, I am never cold, you know! Besides, with these men'sclothes" --

　　"Will you dress here?"

　　"Certainly."

　　"Shall you have time?"

　　"Do not be uneasy, you little coward! All our servants arebusy, discussing the grand affair. Besides, what is thereastonishing, when you think of the grief I ought to be in,that I shut myself up? -- tell me!"

　　"No, truly -- you comfort me."

　　"Come and help me."

　　From the same drawer she took a man's complete costume, fromthe boots to the coat, and a provision of linen, where therewas nothing superfluous, but every requisite. Then, with apromptitude which indicated that this was not the first timeshe had amused herself by adopting the garb of the oppositesex, Eugenie drew on the boots and pantaloons, tied hercravat, buttoned her waistcoat up to the throat, and put ona coat which admirably fitted her beautiful figure. "Oh,that is very good -- indeed, it is very good!" said Louise,looking at her with admiration; "but that beautiful blackhair, those magnificent braids, which made all the ladiessigh with envy, -- will they go under a man's hat like theone I see down there?"

　　"You shall see," said Eugenie. And with her left handseizing the thick mass, which her long fingers couldscarcely grasp, she took in her right hand a pair of longscissors, and soon the steel met through the rich andsplendid hair, which fell in a cluster at her feet as sheleaned back to keep it from her coat. Then she grasped thefront hair, which she also cut off, without expressing theleast regret; on the contrary, her eyes sparkled withgreater pleasure than usual under her ebony eyebrows. "Oh,the magnificent hair!" said Louise, with regret.

　　"And am I not a hundred times better thus?" cried Eugenie,smoothing the scattered curls of her hair, which had nowquite a masculine appearance; "and do you not think mehandsomer so?"

　　"Oh, you are beautiful -- always beautiful!" cried Louise."Now, where are you going?"

　　"To Brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier. Wecan go to Brussels, Liege, Aix-la-Chapelle; then up theRhine to Strasburg. We will cross Switzerland, and go downinto Italy by the Saint-Gothard. Will that do?"

　　"Yes."

　　"What are you looking at?"

　　"I am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that! Onewould say you were carrying me off."

　　"And they would be right, pardieu!"

　　"Oh, I think you swore, Eugenie." And the two young girls,whom every one might have thought plunged in grief, the oneon her own account, the other from interest in her friend,burst out laughing, as they cleared away every visible traceof the disorder which had naturally accompanied thepreparations for their escape. Then, having blown out thelights, the two fugitives, looking and listening eagerly,with outstretched necks, opened the door of a dressing-roomwhich led by a side staircase down to the yard, -- Eugeniegoing first, and holding with one arm the portmanteau, whichby the opposite handle Mademoiselle d'Armilly scarcelyraised with both hands. The yard was empty; the clock wasstriking twelve. The porter was not yet gone to bed. Eugenieapproached softly, and saw the old man sleeping soundly inan arm-chair in his lodge. She returned to Louise, took upthe portmanteau, which she had placed for a moment on theground, and they reached the archway under the shadow of thewall.

　　Eugenie concealed Louise in an angle of the gateway, so thatif the porter chanced to awake he might see but one person.Then placing herself in the full light of the lamp which litthe yard, -- "Gate!" cried she, with her finest contraltovoice, and rapping at the window.

　　The porter got up as Eugenie expected, and even advancedsome steps to recognize the person who was going out, butseeing a young man striking his boot impatiently with hisriding-whip, he opened it immediately. Louise slid throughthe half-open gate like a snake, and bounded lightlyforward. Eugenie, apparently calm, although in allprobability her heart beat somewhat faster than usual, wentout in her turn. A porter was passing and they gave him theportmanteau; then the two young girls, having told him totake it to No. 36, Rue de la Victoire, walked behind thisman, whose presence comforted Louise. As for Eugenie, shewas as strong as a Judith or a Delilah. They arrived at theappointed spot. Eugenie ordered the porter to put down theportmanteau, gave him some pieces of money, and havingrapped at the shutter sent him away. The shutter whereEugenie had rapped was that of a little laundress, who hadbeen previously warned, and was not yet gone to bed. Sheopened the door.

　　"Mademoiselle," said Eugenie, "let the porter get thepost-chaise from the coach-house, and fetch some post-horsesfrom the hotel. Here are five francs for his trouble."

　　"Indeed," said Louise, "I admire you, and I could almost sayrespect you." The laundress looked on in astonishment, butas she had been promised twenty louis, she made no remark.

　　In a quarter of an hour the porter returned with a post-boyand horses, which were harnessed, and put in the post-chaisein a minute, while the porter fastened the portmanteau onwith the assistance of a cord and strap. "Here is thepassport," said the postilion, "which way are we going,young gentleman?"

　　"To Fontainebleau," replied Eugenie with an almost masculinevoice.

　　"What do you say?" said Louise.

　　"I am giving them the slip," said Eugenie; "this woman towhom we have given twenty louis may betray us for forty; wewill soon alter our direction." And the young girl jumpedinto the britzska, which was admirably arranged for sleepingin, without scarcely touching the step. "You are alwaysright," said the music teacher, seating herself by the sideof her friend.

　　A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having beenput in the right road, passed with a crack of his whipthrough the gateway of the Barriere Saint-Martin. "Ah," saidLouise, breathing freely, "here we are out of Paris."

　　"Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,"replied Eugenie. "Yes, and without violence," said Louise.

　　"I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,"replied Eugenie. These words were lost in the noise whichthe carriage made in rolling over the pavement of LaVillette. M. Danglars no longer had a daughter.

　　Chapter 98The Bell and Bottle Tavern.

　　And now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her friendpursuing their way to Brussels, and return to poor AndreaCavalcanti, so inopportunely interrupted in his rise tofortune. Notwithstanding his youth, Master Andrea was a veryskilful and intelligent boy. We have seen that on the firstrumor which reached the salon he had gradually approachedthe door, and crossing two or three rooms at lastdisappeared. But we have forgotten to mention onecircumstance, which nevertheless ought not to be omitted; inone of the rooms he crossed, the trousseau of thebride-elect was on exhibition. There were caskets ofdiamonds, cashmere shawls, Valenciennes lace, Englishveilings, and in fact all the tempting things, the baremention of which makes the hearts of young girls bound withjoy, and which is called the "corbeille."* Now, in passingthrough this room, Andrea proved himself not only to beclever and intelligent, but also provident, for he helpedhimself to the most valuable of the ornaments before him.

　　* Literally, "the basket," because wedding gifts wereoriginally brought in such a receptacle.

　　Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighterheart from the window, intending to slip through the handsof the gendarmes. Tall and well proportioned as an ancientgladiator, and muscular as a Spartan, he walked for aquarter of an hour without knowing where to direct hissteps, actuated by the sole idea of getting away from thespot where if he lingered he knew that he would surely betaken. Having passed through the Rue Mont Blanc, guided bythe instinct which leads thieves always to take the safestpath, he found himself at the end of the Rue Lafayette.There he stopped, breathless and panting. He was quitealone; on one side was the vast wilderness of theSaint-Lazare, on the other, Paris enshrouded in darkness."Am I to be captured?" he cried; "no, not if I can use moreactivity than my enemies. My safety is now a mere questionof speed." At this moment he saw a cab at the top of theFaubourg Poissonniere. The dull driver, smoking his pipe,was plodding along toward the limits of the FaubourgSaint-Denis, where no doubt he ordinarily had his station."Ho, friend!" said Benedetto.

　　"What do you want, sir?" asked the driver.

　　"Is your horse tired?"

　　"Tired? oh, yes, tired enough -- he has done nothing thewhole of this blessed day! Four wretched fares, and twentysous over, making in all seven francs, are all that I haveearned, and I ought to take ten to the owner."

　　"Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?"

　　"With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised.Tell me what I am to do for this."

　　"A very easy thing, if your horse isn't tired."

　　"I tell you he'll go like the wind, -- only tell me whichway to drive."

　　"Towards the Louvres."

　　"Ah, I know the way -- you get good sweetened rum overthere."

　　"Exactly so; I merely wish to overtake one of my friends,with whom I am going to hunt to-morrow atChapelle-en-Serval. He should have waited for me here with acabriolet till half-past eleven; it is twelve, and, tired ofwaiting, he must have gone on."

　　"It is likely."

　　"Well, will you try and overtake him?"

　　"Nothing I should like better."

　　"If you do not overtake him before we reach Bourget youshall have twenty francs; if not before Louvres, thirty."

　　"And if we do overtake him?"

　　"Forty," said Andrea, after a moment's hesitation, at theend of which he remembered that he might safely promise."That's all right," said the man; "hop in, and we're off!Who-o-o-p, la!"

　　Andrea got into the cab, which passed rapidly through theFaubourg Saint-Denis, along the Faubourg Saint-Martin,crossed the barrier, and threaded its way through theinterminable Villette. They never overtook the chimericalfriend, yet Andrea frequently inquired of people on footwhom he passed and at the inns which were not yet closed,for a green cabriolet and bay horse; and as there are agreat many cabriolets to be seen on the road to the LowCountries, and as nine-tenths of them are green, theinquiries increased at every step. Every one had just seenit pass; it was only five hundred, two hundred, one hundredsteps in advance; at length they reached it, but it was notthe friend. Once the cab was also passed by a calash rapidlywhirled along by two post-horses. "Ah," said Cavalcanti tohimself, "if I only had that britzska, those two goodpost-horses, and above all the passport that carries themon!" And he sighed deeply. The calash contained MademoiselleDanglars and Mademoiselle d'Armilly. "Hurry, hurry!" saidAndrea, "we must overtake him soon." And the poor horseresumed the desperate gallop it had kept up since leavingthe barrier, and arrived steaming at Louvres.

　　"Certainly," said Andrea, "I shall not overtake my friend,but I shall kill your horse, therefore I had better stop.Here are thirty francs; I will sleep at the Red Horse, andwill secure a place in the first coach. Good-night, friend."And Andrea, after placing six pieces of five francs each inthe man's hand, leaped lightly on to the pathway. The cabmanjoyfully pocketed the sum, and turned back on his road toParis. Andrea pretended to go towards the Red Horse inn, butafter leaning an instant against the door, and hearing thelast sound of the cab, which was disappearing from view, hewent on his road, and with a lusty stride soon traversed thespace of two leagues. Then he rested; he must be nearChapelle-en-Serval, where he pretended to be going. It wasnot fatigue that stayed Andrea here; it was that he mightform some resolution, adopt some plan. It would beimpossible to make use of a diligence, equally so to engagepost-horses; to travel either way a passport was necessary.It was still more impossible to remain in the department ofthe Oise, one of the most open and strictly guarded inFrance; this was quite out of the question, especially to aman like Andrea, perfectly conversant with criminal matters.

　　He sat down by the side of the moat, buried his face in hishands and reflected. Ten minutes after he raised his head;his resolution was made. He threw some dust over thetopcoat, which he had found time to unhook from theante-chamber and button over his ball costume, and going toChapelle-en-Serval he knocked loudly at the door of the onlyinn in the place. The host opened. "My friend," said Andrea,"I was coming from Montefontaine to Senlis, when my horse,which is a troublesome creature, stumbled and threw me. Imust reach Compiegne to-night, or I shall cause deep anxietyto my family. Could you let me hire a horse of you?"

　　An inn-keeper has always a horse to let, whether it be goodor bad. The host called the stable-boy, and ordered him tosaddle "Whitey," then he awoke his son, a child of sevenyears, whom he ordered to ride before the gentleman andbring back the horse. Andrea gave the inn-keeper twentyfrancs, and in taking them from his pocket dropped avisiting card. This belonged to one of his friends at theCafe de Paris, so that the innkeeper, picking it up afterAndrea had left, was convinced that he had let his horse tothe Count of Mauleon, 25 Rue Saint-Dominique, that being thename and address on the card. "Whitey" was not a fastanimal, but he kept up an easy, steady pace; in three hoursand a half Andrea had traversed the nine leagues whichseparated him from Compiegne, and four o'clock struck as hereached the place where the coaches stop. There is anexcellent tavern at Compiegne, well remembered by those whohave ever been there. Andrea, who had often stayed there inhis rides about Paris, recollected the Bell and Bottle inn;he turned around, saw the sign by the light of a reflectedlamp, and having dismissed the child, giving him all thesmall coin he had about him, he began knocking at the door,very reasonably concluding that having now three or fourhours before him he had best fortify himself against thefatigues of the morrow by a sound sleep and a good supper. Awaiter opened the door.

　　"My friend," said Andrea, "I have been dining atSaint-Jean-au-Bois, and expected to catch the coach whichpasses by at midnight, but like a fool I have lost my way,and have been walking for the last four hours in the forest.Show me into one of those pretty little rooms which overlookthe court, and bring me a cold fowl and a bottle ofBordeaux." The waiter had no suspicions; Andrea spoke withperfect composure, he had a cigar in his mouth, and hishands in the pocket of his top coat; his clothes werefashionably made, his chin smooth, his boots irreproachable;he looked merely as if he had stayed out very late, that wasall. While the waiter was preparing his room, the hostessarose; Andrea assumed his most charming smile, and asked ifhe could have No. 3, which he had occupied on his last stayat Compiegne. Unfortunately, No. 3 was engaged by a youngman who was travelling with his sister. Andrea appeared indespair, but consoled himself when the hostess assured himthat No. 7, prepared for him, was situated precisely thesame as No. 3, and while warming his feet and chatting aboutthe last races at Chantilly, he waited until they announcedhis room to be ready.

　　Andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty roomslooking out upon the court of the Bell Tavern, which withits triple galleries like those of a theatre, with thejessamine and clematis twining round the light columns,forms one of the prettiest entrances to an inn that you canimagine. The fowl was tender, the wine old, the fire clearand sparkling, and Andrea was surprised to find himselfeating with as good an appetite as though nothing hadhappened. Then be went to bed and almost immediately fellinto that deep sleep which is sure to visit men of twentyyears of age, even when they are torn with remorse. Now,here we are obliged to own that Andrea ought to have feltremorse, but that he did not. This was the plan which hadappealed to him to afford the best chance of his security.Before daybreak he would awake, leave the inn afterrigorously paying his bill, and reaching the forest, hewould, under presence of making studies in painting, testthe hospitality of some peasants, procure himself the dressof a woodcutter and a hatchet, casting off the lion's skinto assume that of the woodman; then, with his hands coveredwith dirt, his hair darkened by means of a leaden comb, hiscomplexion embrowned with a preparation for which one of hisold comrades had given him the recipe, he intended, byfollowing the wooded districts, to reach the nearestfrontier, walking by night and sleeping in the day in theforests and quarries, and only entering inhabited regions tobuy a loaf from time to time.

　　Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of hisdiamonds; and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes healways carried about with him in case of accident, he wouldthen find himself possessor of about 50,000 livres, which hephilosophically considered as no very deplorable conditionafter all. Moreover, he reckoned much on the interest of theDanglars to hush up the rumor of their own misadventures.These were the reasons which, added to the fatigue, causedAndrea to sleep so soundly. In order that he might awakenearly he did not close the shutters, but contented himselfwith bolting the door and placing on the table an unclaspedand long-pointed knife, whose temper he well knew, and whichwas never absent from him. About seven in the morning Andreawas awakened by a ray of sunlight, which played, warm andbrilliant, upon his face. In all well-organized brains, thepredominating idea -- and there always is one -- is sure tobe the last thought before sleeping, and the first uponwaking in the morning. Andrea had scarcely opened his eyeswhen his predominating idea presented itself, and whisperedin his ear that he had slept too long. He jumped out of bedand ran to the window. A gendarme was crossing the court. Agendarme is one of the most striking objects in the world,even to a man void of uneasiness; but for one who has atimid conscience, and with good cause too, the yellow, blue,and white uniform is really very alarming.

　　"Why is that gendarme there?" asked Andrea of himself. Then,all at once, he replied, with that logic which the readerhas, doubtless, remarked in him, "There is nothingastonishing in seeing a gendarme at an inn; instead of beingastonished, let me dress myself." And the youth dressedhimself with a facility his valet de chambre had failed torob him of during the two months of fashionable life he hadled in Paris. "Now then," said Andrea, while dressinghimself, "I'll wait till he leaves, and then I'll slipaway." And, saying this, Andrea, who had now put on hisboots and cravat, stole gently to the window, and a secondtime lifted up the muslin curtain. Not only was the firstgendarme still there, but the young man now perceived asecond yellow, blue, and white uniform at the foot of thestaircase, the only one by which he could descend, while athird, on horseback, holding a musket in his fist, wasposted as a sentinel at the great street door which aloneafforded the means of egress.

　　The appearance of the third gendarme settled the matter, fora crowd of curious loungers was extended before him,effectually blocking the entrance to the hotel. "They'reafter me!" was Andrea's first thought. "The devil!" A palloroverspread the young man's forehead, and he looked aroundhim with anxiety. His room, like all those on the samefloor, had but one outlet to the gallery in the sight ofeverybody. "I am lost!" was his second thought; and, indeed,for a man in Andrea's situation, an arrest meant theassizes, trial, and death, -- death without mercy or delay.For a moment he convulsively pressed his head within hishands, and during that brief period he became nearly madwith terror; but soon a ray of hope glimmered in themultitude of thoughts which bewildered his mind, and a faintsmile played upon his white lips and pallid cheeks. Helooked around and saw the objects of his search upon thechimney-piece; they were a pen, ink, and paper. With forcedcomposure he dipped the pen in the ink, and wrote thefollowing lines upon a sheet of paper: --

　　"I have no money to pay my bill, but I am not a dishonestman; I leave behind me as a pledge this pin, worth ten timesthe amount. I shall be excused for leaving at daybreak, forI was ashamed."

　　He then drew the pin from his cravat and placed it on thepaper. This done, instead of leaving the door fastened, hedrew back the bolts and even placed the door ajar, as thoughhe had left the room, forgetting to close it, and slippinginto the chimney like a man accustomed to that kind ofgymnastic exercise, having effaced the marks of his feetupon the floor, he commenced climbing the only opening whichafforded him the means of escape. At this precise time, thefirst gendarme Andrea had noticed walked up-stairs, precededby the commissary of police, and supported by the secondgendarme who guarded the staircase and was himselfre-enforced by the one stationed at the door.

　　Andrea was indebted for this visit to the followingcircumstances. At daybreak, the telegraphs were set at workin all directions, and almost immediately the authorities inevery district had exerted their utmost endeavors to arrestthe murderer of Caderousse. Compiegne, that royal residenceand fortified town, is well furnished with authorities,gendarmes, and commissaries of police; they therefore beganoperations as soon as the telegraphic despatch arrived, andthe Bell and Bottle being the best-known hotel in the town,they had naturally directed their first inquiries there.

　　Now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the Hotelde Ville, which is next door to the Bell and Bottle, it hadbeen stated by others that a number of travellers hadarrived during the night. The sentinel who was relieved atsix o'clock in the morning, remembered perfectly that justas he was taking his post a few minutes past four a youngman arrived on horseback, with a little boy before him. Theyoung man, having dismissed the boy and horse, knocked atthe door of the hotel, which was opened, and again closedafter his entrance. This late arrival had attracted muchsuspicion, and the young man being no other than Andrea, thecommissary and gendarme, who was a brigadier, directed theirsteps towards his room.

　　They found the door ajar. "Oh, ho," said the brigadier, whothoroughly understood the trick; "a bad sign to find thedoor open! I would rather find it triply bolted." And,indeed, the little note and pin upon the table confirmed, orrather corroborated, the sad truth. Andrea had fled. We saycorroborated, because the brigadier was too experienced tobe convinced by a single proof. He glanced around, looked inthe bed, shook the curtains, opened the closets, and finallystopped at the chimney. Andrea had taken the precaution toleave no traces of his feet in the ashes, but still it wasan outlet, and in this light was not to be passed overwithout serious investigation.

　　The brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and havingfilled the chimney with them, set a light to it. The firecrackled, and the smoke ascended like the dull vapor from avolcano; but still no prisoner fell down, as they expected.The fact was, that Andrea, at war with society ever sincehis youth, was quite as deep as a gendarme, even though hewere advanced to the rank of brigadier, and quite preparedfor the fire, he had climbed out on the roof and wascrouching down against the chimney-pots. At one time hethought he was saved, for he heard the brigadier exclaim ina loud voice, to the two gendarmes, "He is not here!" Butventuring to peep, he perceived that the latter, instead ofretiring, as might have been reasonably expected upon thisannouncement, were watching with increased attention.

　　It was now his turn to look about him; the Hotel de Ville, amassive sixteenth century building, was on his right; anyone could descend from the openings in the tower, andexamine every corner of the roof below, and Andrea expectedmomentarily to see the head of a gendarme appear at one ofthese openings. If once discovered, he knew he would belost, for the roof afforded no chance of escape; hetherefore resolved to descend, not through the same chimneyby which he had come up, but by a similar one conducting toanother room. He looked around for a chimney from which nosmoke issued, and having reached it, he disappeared throughthe orifice without being seen by any one. At the sameminute, one of the little windows of the Hotel de Ville wasthrown open, and the head of a gendarme appeared. For aninstant it remained motionless as one of the stonedecorations of the building, then after a long sigh ofdisappointment the head disappeared. The brigadier, calm anddignified as the law he represented, passed through thecrowd, without answering the thousand questions addressed tohim, and re-entered the hotel.

　　"Well?" asked the two gendarmes.

　　"Well, my boys," said the brigadier, "the brigand mustreally have escaped early this morning; but we will send tothe Villers-Coterets and Noyon roads, and search the forest,when we shall catch him, no doubt." The honorablefunctionary had scarcely expressed himself thus, in thatintonation which is peculiar to brigadiers of thegendarmerie, when a loud scream, accompanied by the violentringing of a bell, resounded through the court of the hotel."Ah, what is that?" cried the brigadier.

　　"Some traveller seems impatient," said the host. "Whatnumber was it that rang?"

　　"Number 3."

　　"Run, waiter!" At this moment the screams and ringing wereredoubled. "Ah," said the brigadier, stopping the servant,"the person who is ringing appears to want something morethan a waiter; we will attend upon him with a gendarme. Whooccupies Number 3?"

　　"The little fellow who arrived last night in a post-chaisewith his sister, and who asked for an apartment with twobeds." The bell here rang for the third time, with anothershriek of anguish.

　　"Follow me, Mr. Commissary!" said the brigadier; "tread inmy steps."

　　"Wait an instant," said the host; "Number 3 has twostaircases, -- inside and outside."

　　"Good," said the brigadier. "I will take charge of theinside one. Are the carbines loaded?"

　　"Yes, brigadier."

　　"Well, you guard the exterior, and if he attempts to fly,fire upon him; he must be a great criminal, from what thetelegraph says."

　　The brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared bythe inside staircase, accompanied by the noise which hisassertions respecting Andrea had excited in the crowd. Thisis what had happened. Andrea had very cleverly managed todescend two-thirds of the chimney, but then his footslipped, and notwithstanding his endeavors, he came into theroom with more speed and noise than he intended. It wouldhave signified little had the room been empty, butunfortunately it was occupied. Two ladies, sleeping in onebed, were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes uponthe spot whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man. One ofthese ladies, the fair one, uttered those terrible shriekswhich resounded through the house, while the other, rushingto the bell-rope, rang with all her strength. Andrea, as wecan see, was surrounded by misfortune.

　　"For pity's sake," he cried, pale and bewildered, withoutseeing whom he was addressing, -- "for pity's sake do notcall assistance! Save me! -- I will not harm you."

　　"Andrea, the murderer!" cried one of the ladies.

　　"Eugenie! Mademoiselle Danglars!" exclaimed Andrea,stupefied.

　　"Help, help!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, taking the bellfrom her companion's hand, and ringing it yet moreviolently. "Save me, I am pursued!" said Andrea, claspinghis hands. "For pity, for mercy's sake do not deliver meup!"

　　"It is too late, they are coming," said Eugenie.

　　"Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were needlesslyalarmed; you can turn their suspicions and save my life!"

　　The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawingthe bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to thissupplicating voice, repugnance and fear taking possession oftheir minds.

　　"Well, be it so," at length said Eugenie; "return by thesame road you came, and we will say nothing about you,unhappy wretch."

　　"Here he is, here he is!" cried a voice from the landing;"here he is! I see him!" The brigadier had put his eye tothe keyhole, and had discovered Andrea in a posture ofentreaty. A violent blow from the butt end of the musketburst open the lock, two more forced out the bolts, and thebroken door fell in. Andrea ran to the other door, leadingto the gallery, ready to rush out; but he was stopped short,and he stood with his body a little thrown back, pale, andwith the useless knife in his clinched hand.

　　"Fly, then!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, whose pityreturned as her fears diminished; "fly!"

　　"Or kill yourself!" said Eugenie (in a tone which a Vestalin the amphitheatre would have used, when urging thevictorious gladiator to finish his vanquished adversary).Andrea shuddered, and looked on the young girl with anexpression which proved how little he understood suchferocious honor. "Kill myself?" he cried, throwing down hisknife; "why should I do so?"

　　"Why, you said," answered Mademoiselle Danglars, "that youwould be condemned to die like the worst criminals."

　　"Bah," said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, "one hasfriends."

　　The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand. "Come, come,"said Andrea, "sheathe your sword, my fine fellow; there isno occasion to make such a fuss, since I give myself up;"and he held out his hands to be manacled. The girls lookedwith horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the man of theworld shaking off his covering and appearing as agalley-slave. Andrea turned towards them, and with animpertinent smile asked, -- "Have you any message for yourfather, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all probability Ishall return to Paris?"

　　Eugenie covered her face with her hands. "Oh, ho!" saidAndrea, "you need not be ashamed, even though you did postafter me. Was I not nearly your husband?"

　　And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the twogirls a prey to their own feelings of shame, and to thecomments of the crowd. An hour after they stepped into theircalash, both dressed in feminine attire. The gate of thehotel had been closed to screen them from sight, but theywere forced, when the door was open, to pass through athrong of curious glances and whispering voices. Eugenieclosed her eyes; but though she could not see, she couldhear, and the sneers of the crowd reached her in thecarriage. "Oh, why is not the world a wilderness?" sheexclaimed, throwing herself into the arms of Mademoiselled'Armilly, her eyes sparkling with the same kind of ragewhich made Nero wish that the Roman world had but one neck,that he might sever it at a single blow. The next day theystopped at the Hotel de Flandre, at Brussels. The sameevening Andrea was incarcerated in the Conciergerie.

　　Chapter 99The Law.

　　We have seen how quietly Mademoiselle Danglars andMademoiselle d'Armilly accomplished their transformation andflight; the fact being that every one was too much occupiedin his or her own affairs to think of theirs. We will leavethe banker contemplating the enormous magnitude of his debtbefore the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness,who after being momentarily crushed under the weight of theblow which had struck her, had gone to seek her usualadviser, Lucien Debray. The baroness had looked forward tothis marriage as a means of ridding her of a guardianshipwhich, over a girl of Eugenie's character, could not fail tobe rather a troublesome undertaking; for in the tacitrelations which maintain the bond of family union, themother, to maintain her ascendancy over her daughter, mustnever fail to be a model of wisdom and a type of perfection.

　　Now, Madame Danglars feared Eugenie's sagacity and theinfluence of Mademoiselle d'Armilly; she had frequentlyobserved the contemptuous expression with which her daughterlooked upon Debray, -- an expression which seemed to implythat she understood all her mother's amorous and pecuniaryrelationships with the intimate secretary; moreover, she sawthat Eugenie detested Debray, -- not only because he was asource of dissension and scandal under the paternal roof,but because she had at once classed him in that catalogue ofbipeds whom Plato endeavors to withdraw from the appellationof men, and whom Diogenes designated as animals upon twolegs without feathers.

　　Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person viewsthings through a certain medium, and so is prevented fromseeing in the same light as others, and Madame Danglars,therefore, very much regretted that the marriage of Eugeniehad not taken place, not only because the match was good,and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but becauseit would also set her at liberty. She ran therefore toDebray, who, after having like the rest of Paris witnessedthe contract scene and the scandal attending it, had retiredin haste to his club, where he was chatting with somefriends upon the events which served as a subject ofconversation for three-fourths of that city known as thecapital of the world.

　　At the precise time when Madame Danglars, dressed in blackand concealed in a long veil, was ascending the stairsleading to Debray's apartments, -- notwithstanding theassurances of the concierge that the young man was not athome, -- Debray was occupied in repelling the insinuationsof a friend, who tried to persuade him that after theterrible scene which had just taken place he ought, as afriend of the family, to marry Mademoiselle Danglars and hertwo millions. Debray did not defend himself very warmly, forthe idea had sometimes crossed his mind; still, when herecollected the independent, proud spirit of Eugenie, hepositively rejected it as utterly impossible, though thesame thought again continually recurred and found aresting-place in his heart. Tea, play, and the conversation,which had become interesting during the discussion of suchserious affairs, lasted till one o'clock in the morning.

　　Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited thereturn of Debray in the little green room, seated betweentwo baskets of flowers, which she had that morning sent, andwhich, it must be confessed, Debray had himself arranged andwatered with so much care that his absence was half excusedin the eyes of the poor woman.

　　At twenty minutes of twelve, Madame Danglars, tired ofwaiting, returned home. Women of a certain grade are likeprosperous grisettes in one respect, they seldom return homeafter twelve o'clock. The baroness returned to the hotelwith as much caution as Eugenie used in leaving it; she ranlightly up-stairs, and with an aching heart entered herapartment, contiguous, as we know, to that of Eugenie. Shewas fearful of exciting any remark, and believed firmly inher daughter's innocence and fidelity to the paternal roof.She listened at Eugenie's door, and hearing no sound triedto enter, but the bolts were in place. Madame Danglars thenconcluded that the young girl had been overcome with theterrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed andto sleep. She called the maid and questioned her.

　　"Mademoiselle Eugenie," said the maid, "retired to herapartment with Mademoiselle d'Armilly; they then took teatogether, after which they desired me to leave, saying thatthey needed me no longer." Since then the maid had beenbelow, and like every one else she thought the young ladieswere in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore, went tobed without a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse overthe recent events. In proportion as her memory becameclearer, the occurrences of the evening were revealed intheir true light; what she had taken for confusion was atumult; what she had regarded as something distressing, wasin reality a disgrace. And then the baroness remembered thatshe had felt no pity for poor Mercedes, who had beenafflicted with as severe a blow through her husband and son.

　　"Eugenie," she said to herself, "is lost, and so are we. Theaffair, as it will be reported, will cover us with shame;for in a society such as ours satire inflicts a painful andincurable wound. How fortunate that Eugenie is possessed ofthat strange character which has so often made me tremble!"And her glance was turned towards heaven, where a mysteriousprovidence disposes all things, and out of a fault, nay,even a vice, sometimes produces a blessing. And then herthoughts, cleaving through space like a bird in the air,rested on Cavalcanti. This Andrea was a wretch, a robber, anassassin, and yet his manners showed the effects of a sortof education, if not a complete one; he had been presentedto the world with the appearance of an immense fortune,supported by an honorable name. How could she extricateherself from this labyrinth? To whom would she apply to helpher out of this painful situation? Debray, to whom she hadrun, with the first instinct of a woman towards the man sheloves, and who yet betrays her, -- Debray could but give heradvice, she must apply to some one more powerful than he.

　　The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. deVillefort who had remorselessly brought misfortune into herfamily, as though they had been strangers. But, no; onreflection, the procureur was not a merciless man; and itwas not the magistrate, slave to his duties, but the friend,the loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the verycore of the corruption; it was not the executioner, but thesurgeon, who wished to withdraw the honor of Danglars fromignominious association with the disgraced young man theyhad presented to the world as their son-in-law. And sinceVillefort, the friend of Danglars, had acted in this way, noone could suppose that he had been previously acquaintedwith, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea's intrigues.Villefort's conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared tothe baroness as if shaped for their mutual advantage. Butthe inflexibility of the procureur should stop there; shewould see him the next day, and if she could not make himfail in his duties as a magistrate, she would, at least,obtain all the indulgence he could allow. She would invokethe past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate himby the remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. M. deVillefort would stifle the affair; he had only to turn hiseyes on one side, and allow Andrea to fly, and follow up thecrime under that shadow of guilt called contempt of court.And after this reasoning she slept easily.

　　At nine o'clock next morning she arose, and without ringingfor her maid or giving the least sign of her activity, shedressed herself in the same simple style as on the previousnight; then running down-stairs, she left the hotel. walkedto the Rue de Provence, called a cab, and drove to M. deVillefort's house. For the last month this wretched househad presented the gloomy appearance of a lazaretto infectedwith the plague. Some of the apartments were closed withinand without; the shutters were only opened to admit aminute's air, showing the scared face of a footman, andimmediately afterwards the window would be closed, like agravestone falling on a sepulchre, and the neighbors wouldsay to each other in a low voice, "Will there be anotherfuneral to-day at the procureur's house?" Madame Danglarsinvoluntarily shuddered at the desolate aspect of themansion; descending from the cab, she approached the doorwith trembling knees, and rang the bell. Three times did thebell ring with a dull, heavy sound, seeming to participate,in the general sadness, before the concierge appeared andpeeped through the door, which he opened just wide enough toallow his words to be heard. He saw a lady, a fashionable,elegantly dressed lady, and yet the door remained almostclosed.

　　"Do you intend opening the door?" said the baroness.

　　"First, madame, who are you?"

　　"Who am I? You know me well enough."

　　"We no longer know any one, madame."

　　"You must be mad, my friend," said the baroness.

　　"Where do you come from?"

　　"Oh, this is too much!"

　　"Madame, these are my orders; excuse me. Your name?"

　　"The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times."

　　"Possibly, madame. And now, what do you want?"

　　"Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefortof the impertinence of his servants."

　　"Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one entershere without an order from M. d'Avrigny, or without speakingto the procureur."

　　"Well, I have business with the procureur."

　　"Is it pressing business?"

　　"You can imagine so, since I have not even brought mycarriage out yet. But enough of this -- here is my card,take it to your master."

　　"Madame will await my return?"

　　"Yes; go." The concierge closed the door, leaving MadameDanglars in the street. She had not long to wait; directlyafterwards the door was opened wide enough to admit her, andwhen she had passed through, it was again shut. Withoutlosing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took awhistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court,and blew it. The valet de chambre appeared on thedoor-steps. "You will excuse this poor fellow, madame," hesaid, as he preceded the baroness, "but his orders areprecise, and M. de Villefort begged me to tell you that hecould not act otherwise."

　　In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman whohad been admitted with the same precautions. The baronessascended the steps; she felt herself strongly infected withthe sadness which seemed to magnify her own, and stillguided by the valet de chambre, who never lost sight of herfor an instant, she was introduced to the magistrate'sstudy. Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with theobject of her visit, the treatment she had received fromthese underlings appeared to her so insulting, that shebegan by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising his head,bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smilethat her complaints died upon her lips. "Forgive myservants," he said, "for a terror I cannot blame them for;from being suspected they have become suspicious."

　　Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which themagistrate alluded, but without the evidence of her owneyesight she could never have believed that the sentimenthad been carried so far. "You too, then, are unhappy?" shesaid. "Yes, madame," replied the magistrate.

　　"Then you pity me!"

　　"Sincerely, madame."

　　"And you understand what brings me here?"

　　"You wish to speak to me about the circumstance which hasjust happened?"

　　"Yes, sir, -- a fearful misfortune."

　　"You mean a mischance."

　　"A mischance?" repeated the baroness.

　　"Alas, madame," said the procureur with his imperturbablecalmness of manner, "I consider those alone misfortuneswhich are irreparable."

　　"And do you suppose this will be forgotten?"

　　"Everything will be forgotten, madame," said Villefort."Your daughter will be married to-morrow, if not to-day --in a week, if not to-morrow; and I do not think you canregret the intended husband of your daughter."

　　Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him soalmost insultingly calm. "Am I come to a friend?" she askedin a tone full of mournful dignity. "You know that you are,madame," said Villefort, whose pale cheeks became slightlyflushed as he gave her the assurance. And truly thisassurance carried him back to different events from thosenow occupying the baroness and him. "Well, then, be moreaffectionate, my dear Villefort," said the baroness. "Speakto me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when I am inbitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to begay." Villefort bowed. "When I hear misfortunes named,madame," he said, "I have within the last few mouthscontracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, and then Icannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind.That is the reason that by the side of my misfortunes yoursappear to me mere mischances; that is why my dreadfulposition makes yours appear enviable. But this annoys you;let us change the subject. You were saying, madame" --

　　"I came to ask you, my friend," said the baroness, "whatwill be done with this impostor?"

　　"Impostor," repeated Villefort; "certainly, madame, youappear to extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others.Impostor, indeed! -- M. Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather M.Benedetto, is nothing more nor less than an assassin!"

　　"Sir, I do not deny the justice of your correction, but themore severely you arm yourself against that unfortunate man,the more deeply will you strike our family. Come, forget himfor a moment, and instead of pursuing him let him go."

　　"You are too late, madame; the orders are issued."

　　"Well, should he be arrested -- do they think they willarrest him?"

　　"I hope so."

　　"If they should arrest him (I know that sometimes prisonersafford means of escape), will you leave him in prison?" --The procureur shook his head. "At least keep him there tillmy daughter be married."

　　"Impossible, madame; justice has its formalities."

　　"What, even for me?" said the baroness, half jesting, halfin earnest. "For all, even for myself among the rest,"replied Villefort.

　　"Ah," exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideaswhich the exclamation betrayed. Villefort looked at her withthat piercing glance which reads the secrets of the heart."Yes, I know what you mean," he said; "you refer to theterrible rumors spread abroad in the world, that the deathswhich have kept me in mourning for the last three months,and from which Valentine has only escaped by a miracle, havenot happened by natural means."

　　"I was not thinking of that," replied Madame Danglarsquickly. "Yes, you were thinking of it, and with justice.You could not help thinking of it, and saying to yourself,`you, who pursue crime so vindictively, answer now, why arethere unpunished crimes in your dwelling?'" The baronessbecame pale. "You were saying this, were you not?"

　　"Well, I own it."

　　"I will answer you."

　　Villefort drew his armchair nearer to Madame Danglars; thenresting both hands upon his desk he said in a voice morehollow than usual: "There are crimes which remain unpunishedbecause the criminals are unknown, and we might strike theinnocent instead of the guilty; but when the culprits arediscovered" (Villefort here extended his hand toward a largecrucifix placed opposite to his desk) -- "when they arediscovered, I swear to you, by all I hold most sacred, thatwhoever they may be they shall die. Now, after the oath Ihave just taken, and which I will keep, madame, dare you askfor mercy for that wretch!"

　　"But, sir, are you sure he is as guilty as they say?"

　　"Listen; this is his description: `Benedetto, condemned, atthe age of sixteen, for five years to the galleys forforgery.' He promised well, as you see -- first a runaway,then an assassin."

　　"And who is this wretch?"

　　"Who can tell? -- a vagabond, a Corsican."

　　"Has no one owned him?"

　　"No one; his parents are unknown."

　　"But who was the man who brought him from Lucca?"

　　"Another rascal like himself, perhaps his accomplice." Thebaroness clasped her hands. "Villefort," she exclaimed inher softest and most captivating manner.

　　"For heaven's sake, madame," said Villefort, with a firmnessof expression not altogether free from harshness -- "forheaven's sake, do not ask pardon of me for a guilty wretch!What am I? -- the law. Has the law any eyes to witness yourgrief? Has the law ears to be melted by your sweet voice?Has the law a memory for all those soft recollections youendeavor to recall? No, madame; the law has commanded, andwhen it commands it strikes. You will tell me that I am aliving being, and not a code -- a man, and not a volume.Look at me, madame -- look around me. Have mankind treatedme as a brother? Have they loved me? Have they spared me?Has any one shown the mercy towards me that you now ask atmy hands? No, madame, they struck me, always struck me!

　　"Woman, siren that you are, do you persist in fixing on methat fascinating eye, which reminds me that I ought toblush? Well, be it so; let me blush for the faults you know,and perhaps -- perhaps for even more than those! But havingsinned myself, -- it may be more deeply than others, -- Inever rest till I have torn the disguises from myfellow-creatures, and found out their weaknesses. I havealways found them; and more, -- I repeat it with joy, withtriumph, -- I have always found some proof of humanperversity or error. Every criminal I condemn seems to meliving evidence that I am not a hideous exception to therest. Alas, alas, alas; all the world is wicked; let ustherefore strike at wickedness!"

　　Villefort pronounced these last words with a feverish rage,which gave a ferocious eloquence to his words.

　　"But"' said Madame Danglars, resolving to make a lasteffort, "this young man, though a murderer, is an orphan,abandoned by everybody."

　　"So much the worse, or rather, so much the better; it hasbeen so ordained that he may have none to weep his fate."

　　"But this is trampling on the weak, sir."

　　"The weakness of a murderer!"

　　"His dishonor reflects upon us."

　　"Is not death in my house?"

　　"Oh, sir," exclaimed the baroness, "you are without pity forothers, well, then, I tell you they will have no mercy onyou!"

　　"Be it so!" said Villefort, raising his arms to heaven.

　　"At least, delay the trial till the next assizes; we shallthen have six months before us."

　　"No, madame," said Villefort; "instructions have been given,There are yet five days left; five days are more than Irequire. Do you not think that I also long forforgetfulness? While working night and day, I sometimes loseall recollection of the past, and then I experience the samesort of happiness I can imagine the dead feel; still, it isbetter than suffering."

　　"But, sir, he has fled; let him escape -- inaction is apardonable offence."

　　"I tell you it is too late; early this morning the telegraphwas employed, and at this very minute" --

　　"Sir," said the valet de chambre, entering the room, "adragoon has brought this despatch from the minister of theinterior." Villefort seized the letter, and hastily brokethe seal. Madame Danglars trembled with fear; Villefortstarted with joy. "Arrested!" he exclaimed; "he was taken atCompiegne, and all is over." Madame Danglars rose from herseat, pale and cold. "Adieu, sir," she said. "Adieu,madame," replied the king's attorney, as in an almost joyfulmanner he conducted her to the door. Then, turning to hisdesk, he said, striking the letter with the back of hisright hand, "Come, I had a forgery, three robberies, and twocases of arson, I only wanted a murder, and here it is. Itwill be a splendid session!"

　　Chapter 110The Indictment.

　　The judges took their places in the midst of the mostprofound silence; the jury took their seats; M. deVillefort, the object of unusual attention, and we hadalmost said of general admiration, sat in the arm-chair andcast a tranquil glance around him. Every one looked withastonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calmexpression personal griefs had been unable to disturb, andthe aspect of a man who was a stranger to all human emotionsexcited something very like terror.

　　"Gendarmes," said the president, "lead in the accused."

　　At these words the public attention became more intense, andall eyes were turned towards the door through whichBenedetto was to enter. The door soon opened and the accusedappeared. The same impression was experienced by allpresent, and no one was deceived by the expression of hiscountenance. His features bore no sign of that deep emotionwhich stops the beating of the heart and blanches the cheek.His hands, gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the other inthe opening of his white waistcoat, were not at alltremulous; his eye was calm and even brilliant. Scarcely hadhe entered the hall when he glanced at the whole body ofmagistrates and assistants; his eye rested longer on thepresident, and still more so on the king's attorney. By theside of Andrea was stationed the lawyer who was to conducthis defence, and who had been appointed by the court, forAndrea disdained to pay any attention to those details, towhich he appeared to attach no importance. The lawyer was ayoung man with light hair whose face expressed a hundredtimes more emotion than that which characterized theprisoner.

　　The president called for the indictment, revised as we know,by the clever and implacable pen of Villefort. During thereading of this, which was long, the public attention wascontinually drawn towards Andrea, who bore the inspectionwith Spartan unconcern. Villefort had never been so conciseand eloquent. The crime was depicted in the most vividcolors; the former life of the prisoner, his transformation,a review of his life from the earliest period, were setforth with all the talent that a knowledge of human lifecould furnish to a mind like that of the procureur.Benedetto was thus forever condemned in public opinionbefore the sentence of the law could be pronounced. Andreapaid no attention to the successive charges which werebrought against him. M. de Villefort, who examined himattentively, and who no doubt practiced upon him all thepsychological studies he was accustomed to use, in vainendeavored to make him lower his eyes, notwithstanding thedepth and profundity of his gaze. At length the reading ofthe indictment was ended.

　　"Accused," said the president, "your name and surname?"Andrea arose. "Excuse me, Mr. President," he said, in aclear voice, "but I see you are going to adopt a course ofquestions through which I cannot follow you. I have an idea,which I will explain by and by, of making an exception tothe usual form of accusation. Allow me, then, if you please,to answer in different order, or I will not do so at all."The astonished president looked at the jury, who in turnlooked at Villefort. The whole assembly manifested greatsurprise, but Andrea appeared quite unmoved. "Your age?"said the president; "will you answer that question?"

　　"I will answer that question, as well as the rest, Mr.President, but in its turn."

　　"Your age?" repeated the president.

　　"I am twenty-one years old, or rather I shall be in a fewdays, as I was born the night of the 27th of September,1817." M. de Villefort, who was busy taking down some notes,raised his head at the mention of this date. "Where were youborn?" continued the president.

　　"At Auteuil, near Paris." M. de Villefort a second timeraised his head, looked at Benedetto as if he had beengazing at the head of Medusa, and became livid. As forBenedetto, he gracefully wiped his lips with a fine cambricpocket-handkerchief. "Your profession?"

　　"First I was a forger," answered Andrea, as calmly aspossible; "then I became a thief, and lately have become anassassin." A murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burstfrom all parts of the assembly. The judges themselvesappeared to be stupefied, and the jury manifested tokens ofdisgust for cynicism so unexpected in a man of fashion. M.de Villefort pressed his hand upon his brow, which, at firstpale, had become red and burning; then he suddenly arose andlooked around as though he had lost his senses -- he wantedair.

　　"Are you looking for anything, Mr. Procureur?" askedBenedetto, with his most ingratiating smile. M. de Villefortanswered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself downagain upon his chair. "And now, prisoner, will you consentto tell your name?" said the president. "The brutalaffectation with which you have enumerated and classifiedyour crimes calls for a severe reprimand on the part of thecourt, both in the name of morality, and for the respect dueto humanity. You appear to consider this a point of honor,and it may be for this reason, that you have delayedacknowledging your name. You wished it to be preceded by allthese titles."

　　"It is quite wonderful, Mr. President, how entirely you haveread my thoughts," said Benedetto, in his softest voice andmost polite manner. "This is, indeed, the reason why Ibegged you to alter the order of the questions." The publicastonishment had reached its height. There was no longer anydeceit or bravado in the manner of the accused. The audiencefelt that a startling revelation was to follow this ominousprelude.

　　"Well," said the president; "your name?"

　　"I cannot tell you my name, since I do not know it; but Iknow my father's, and can tell it to you."

　　A painful giddiness overwhelmed Villefort; great drops ofacrid sweat fell from his face upon the papers which he heldin his convulsed hand.

　　"Repeat your father's name," said the president. Not awhisper, not a breath, was heard in that vast assembly;every one waited anxiously.

　　"My father is king's attorney," replied Andrea calmly.

　　"King's attorney?" said the president, stupefied, andwithout noticing the agitation which spread over the face ofM. de Villefort; "king's attorney?"

　　"Yes; and if you wish to know his name, I will tell it, --he is named Villefort." The explosion, which had been solong restrained from a feeling of respect to the court ofjustice, now burst forth like thunder from the breasts ofall present; the court itself did not seek to restrain thefeelings of the audience. The exclamations, the insultsaddressed to Benedetto, who remained perfectly unconcerned,the energetic gestures, the movement of the gendarmes, thesneers of the scum of the crowd always sure to rise to thesurface in case of any disturbance -- all this lasted fiveminutes, before the door-keepers and magistrates were ableto restore silence. In the midst of this tumult the voice ofthe president was heard to exclaim, -- "Are you playing withjustice, accused, and do you dare set your fellow-citizensan example of disorder which even in these times his neverbeen equalled?"

　　Several persons hurried up to M. de Villefort, who sat halfbowed over in his chair, offering him consolation,encouragement, and protestations of zeal and sympathy. Orderwas re-established in the hall, except that a few peoplestill moved about and whispered to one another. A lady, itwas said, had just fainted; they had supplied her with asmelling-bottle, and she had recovered. During the scene oftumult, Andrea had turned his smiling face towards theassembly; then, leaning with one hand on the oaken rail ofthe dock, in the most graceful attitude possible, he said:"Gentlemen, I assure you I had no idea of insulting thecourt, or of making a useless disturbance in the presence ofthis honorable assembly. They ask my age; I tell it. Theyask where I was born; I answer. They ask my name, I cannotgive it, since my parents abandoned me. But though I cannotgive my own name, not possessing one, I can tell them myfather's. Now I repeat, my father is named M. de Villefort,and I am ready to prove it."

　　There was an energy, a conviction, and a sincerity in themanner of the young man, which silenced the tumult. All eyeswere turned for a moment towards the procureur, who sat asmotionless as though a thunderbolt had changed him into acorpse. "Gentlemen," said Andrea, commanding silence by hisvoice and manner; "I owe you the proofs and explanations ofwhat I have said."

　　"But," said the irritated president, "you called yourselfBenedetto, declared yourself an orphan, and claimed Corsicaas your country."

　　"I said anything I pleased, in order that the solemndeclaration I have just made should not be withheld, whichotherwise would certainly have been the case. I now repeatthat I was born at Auteuil on the night of the 27th ofSeptember, 1817, and that I am the son of the procureur, M.de Villefort. Do you wish for any further details? I willgive them. I was born in No. 28, Rue de la Fontaine, in aroom hung with red damask; my father took me in his arms,telling my mother I was dead, wrapped me in a napkin markedwith an H and an N, and carried me into a garden, where heburied me alive."

　　A shudder ran through the assembly when they saw that theconfidence of the prisoner increased in proportion to theterror of M. de Villefort. "But how have you becomeacquainted with all these details?" asked the president.

　　"I will tell you, Mr. President. A man who had swornvengeance against my father, and had long watched hisopportunity to kill him, had introduced himself that nightinto the garden in which my father buried me. He wasconcealed in a thicket; he saw my father bury something inthe ground, and stabbed him; then thinking the deposit mightcontain some treasure he turned up the ground, and found mestill living. The man carried me to the foundling asylum,where I was registered under the number 37. Three monthsafterwards, a woman travelled from Rogliano to Paris tofetch me, and having claimed me as her son, carried me away.Thus, you see, though born in Paris, I was brought up inCorsica."

　　There was a moment's silence, during which one could havefancied the hall empty, so profound was the stillness."Proceed," said the president.

　　"Certainly, I might have lived happily amongst those goodpeople, who adored me, but my perverse disposition prevailedover the virtues which my adopted mother endeavored toinstil into my heart. I increased in wickedness till Icommitted crime. One day when I cursed providence for makingme so wicked, and ordaining me to such a fate, my adoptedfather said to me, `Do not blaspheme, unhappy child, thecrime is that of your father, not yours, -- of your father,who consigned you to hell if you died, and to misery if amiracle preserved you alive.' After that I ceased toblaspheme, but I cursed my father. That is why I haveuttered the words for which you blame me; that is why I havefilled this whole assembly with horror. If I have committedan additional crime, punish me, but if you will allow thatever since the day of my birth my fate has been sad, bitter,and lamentable, then pity me."

　　"But your mother?" asked the president.

　　"My mother thought me dead; she is not guilty. I did noteven wish to know her name, nor do I know it." Just then apiercing cry, ending in a sob, burst from the centre of thecrowd, who encircled the lady who had before fainted, andwho now fell into a violent fit of hysterics. She wascarried out of the hall, the thick veil which concealed herface dropped off, and Madame Danglars was recognized.Notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing sensationin his ears, and the madness which turned his brain,Villefort rose as he perceived her. "The proofs, theproofs!" said the president; "remember this tissue ofhorrors must be supported by the clearest proofs "

　　"The proofs?" said Benedetto, laughing; "do you wantproofs?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Well, then, look at M. de Villefort, and then ask me forproofs."

　　Every one turned towards the procureur, who, unable to bearthe universal gaze now riveted on him alone, advancedstaggering into the midst of the tribunal, with his hairdishevelled and his face indented with the mark of hisnails. The whole assembly uttered a long murmur ofastonishment. "Father," said Benedetto, "I am asked forproofs, do you wish me to give them?"

　　"No, no, it is useless," stammered M. de Villefort in ahoarse voice; "no, it is useless!"

　　"How useless?" cried the president, "what do you mean?"

　　"I mean that I feel it impossible to struggle against thisdeadly weight which crushes me. Gentlemen, I know I am inthe hands of an avenging God! We need no proofs; everythingrelating to this young man is true." A dull, gloomy silence,like that which precedes some awful phenomenon of nature,pervaded the assembly, who shuddered in dismay. "What, M. deVillefort," cried the president, "do you yield to anhallucination? What, are you no longer in possession of yoursenses? This strange, unexpected, terrible accusation hasdisordered your reason. Come, recover."

　　The procureur dropped his head; his teeth chattered likethose of a man under a violent attack of fever, and yet hewas deadly pale.

　　"I am in possession of all my senses, sir," he said; "mybody alone suffers, as you may suppose. I acknowledge myselfguilty of all the young man has brought against me, and fromthis hour hold myself under the authority of the procureurwho will succeed me."

　　And as he spoke these words with a hoarse, choking voice, hestaggered towards the door, which was mechanically opened bya door-keeper. The whole assembly were dumb withastonishment at the revelation and confession which hadproduced a catastrophe so different from that which had beenexpected during the last fortnight by the Parisian world.

　　"Well," said Beauchamp, "let them now say that drama isunnatural!"

　　"Ma foi!" said Chateau-Renaud, "I would rather end my careerlike M. de Morcerf; a pistol-shot seems quite delightfulcompared with this catastrophe."

　　"And moreover, it kills," said Beauchamp.

　　"And to think that I had an idea of marrying his daughter,"said Debray. "She did well to die, poor girl!"

　　"The sitting is adjourned, gentlemen," said the president;"fresh inquiries will be made, and the case will be triednext session by another magistrate." As for Andrea, who wascalm and more interesting than ever, he left the hall,escorted by gendarmes, who involuntarily paid him someattention. "Well, what do you think of this, my finefellow?" asked Debray of the sergeant-at-arms, slipping alouis into his hand. "There will be extenuatingcircumstances," he replied.

　　Chapter 111Expiation.

　　Notwithstanding the density of the crowd, M. de Villefortsaw it open before him. There is something so awe-inspiringin great afflictions that even in the worst times the firstemotion of a crowd has generally been to sympathize with thesufferer in a great catastrophe. Many people have beenassassinated in a tumult, but even criminals have rarelybeen insulted during trial. Thus Villefort passed throughthe mass of spectators and officers of the Palais, andwithdrew. Though he had acknowledged his guilt, he wasprotected by his grief. There are some situations which menunderstand by instinct, but which reason is powerless toexplain; in such cases the greatest poet is he who givesutterance to the most natural and vehement outburst ofsorrow. Those who hear the bitter cry are as much impressedas if they listened to an entire poem, and when the suffereris sincere they are right in regarding his outburst assublime.

　　It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor inwhich Villefort left the Palais. Every pulse beat withfeverish excitement, every nerve was strained, every veinswollen, and every part of his body seemed to sufferdistinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his agony athousand-fold. He made his way along the corridors throughforce of habit; he threw aside his magisterial robe, not outof deference to etiquette, but because it was an unbearableburden, a veritable garb of Nessus, insatiate in torture.Having staggered as far as the Rue Dauphine, he perceivedhis carriage, awoke his sleeping coachman by opening thedoor himself, threw himself on the cushions, and pointedtowards the Faubourg Saint-Honore; the carriage drove on.The weight of his fallen fortunes seemed suddenly to crushhim; he could not foresee the consequences; he could notcontemplate the future with the indifference of the hardenedcriminal who merely faces a contingency already familiar.God was still in his heart. "God," he murmured, not knowingwhat he said, -- "God -- God!" Behind the event that hadoverwhelmed him he saw the hand of God. The carriage rolledrapidly onward. Villefort, while turning restlessly on thecushions, felt something press against him. He put out hishand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame deVillefort had left in the carriage; this fan awakened arecollection which darted through his mind like lightning.He thought of his wife.

　　"Oh!" he exclaimed, as though a redhot iron were piercinghis heart. During the last hour his own crime had alone beenpresented to his mind; now another object, not lessterrible, suddenly presented itself. His wife! He had justacted the inexorable judge with her, he had condemned her todeath, and she, crushed by remorse, struck with terror,covered with the shame inspired by the eloquence of hisirreproachable virtue, -- she, a poor, weak woman, withouthelp or the power of defending herself against his absoluteand supreme will, -- she might at that very moment, perhaps,be preparing to die! An hour had elapsed since hercondemnation; at that moment, doubtless, she was recallingall her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon for hersins; perhaps she was even writing a letter imploringforgiveness from her virtuous husband -- a forgiveness shewas purchasing with her death! Villefort again groaned withanguish and despair. "Ah," he exclaimed, "that woman becamecriminal only from associating with me! I carried theinfection of crime with me, and she has caught it as shewould the typhus fever, the cholera, the plague! And yet Ihave punished her -- I have dared to tell her -- I have --`Repent and die!' But no, she must not die; she shall live,and with me. We will flee from Paris and go as far as theearth reaches. I told her of the scaffold; oh, heavens, Iforgot that it awaits me also! How could I pronounce thatword? Yes, we will fly; I will confess all to her, -- I willtell her daily that I also have committed a crime! -- Oh,what an alliance -- the tiger and the serpent; worthy wifeof such as I am! She must live that my infamy may diminishhers." And Villefort dashed open the window in front of thecarriage.

　　"Faster, faster!" he cried, in a tone which electrified thecoachman. The horses, impelled by fear, flew towards thehouse.

　　"Yes, yes," repeated Villefort, as he approached his home --"yes, that woman must live; she must repent, and educate myson, the sole survivor, with the exception of theindestructible old man, of the wreck of my house. She loveshim; it was for his sake she has committed these crimes. Weought never to despair of softening the heart of a motherwho loves her child. She will repent, and no one will knowthat she has been guilty. The events which have taken placein my house, though they now occupy the public mind, will beforgotten in time, or if, indeed, a few enemies shouldpersist in remembering them, why then I will add them to mylist of crimes. What will it signify if one, two, or threemore are added? My wife and child shall escape from thisgulf, carrying treasures with them; she will live and mayyet be happy, since her child, in whom all her love iscentred, will be with her. I shall have performed a goodaction, and my heart will be lighter." And the procureurbreathed more freely than he had done for some time.

　　The carriage stopped at the door of the house. Villefortleaped out of the carriage, and saw that his servants weresurprised at his early return; he could read no otherexpression on their features. Neither of them spoke to him;they merely stood aside to let him pass by, as usual,nothing more. As he passed by M. Noirtier's room, heperceived two figures through the half-open door; but heexperienced no curiosity to know who was visiting hisfather: anxiety carried him on further.

　　"Come," he said, as he ascended the stairs leading to hiswife's room, "nothing is changed here." He then closed thedoor of the landing. "No one must disturb us," he said; "Imust speak freely to her, accuse myself, and say" -- heapproached the door, touched the crystal handle, whichyielded to his hand. "Not locked," he cried; "that is well."And he entered the little room in which Edward slept; forthough the child went to school during the day, his mothercould not allow him to be separated from her at night. Witha single glance Villefort's eye ran through the room. "Nothere," he said; "doubtless she is in her bedroom." He rushedtowards the door, found it bolted, and stopped, shuddering."Heloise!" he cried. He fancied he heard the sound of apiece of furniture being removed. "Heloise!" he repeated.

　　"Who is there?" answered the voice of her he sought. Hethought that voice more feeble than usual.

　　"Open the door!" cried Villefort. "Open; it is I." Butnotwithstanding this request, notwithstanding the tone ofanguish in which it was uttered, the door remained closed.Villefort burst it open with a violent blow. At the entranceof the room which led to her boudoir, Madame de Villefortwas standing erect, pale, her features contracted, and hereyes glaring horribly. "Heloise, Heloise!" he said, "what isthe matter? Speak!" The young woman extended her stiff whitehands towards him. "It is done, monsieur," she said with arattling noise which seemed to tear her throat. "What moredo you want?" and she fell full length on the floor.Villefort ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsivelyclasped a crystal bottle with a golden stopper. Madame deVillefort was dead. Villefort, maddened with horror, steppedback to the threshhold of the door, fixing his eyes on thecorpse: "My son!" he exclaimed suddenly, "where is my son?-- Edward, Edward!" and he rushed out of the room, stillcrying, "Edward, Edward!" The name was pronounced in such atone of anguish that the servants ran up.

　　"Where is my son?" asked Villefort; "let him be removed fromthe house, that he may not see" --

　　"Master Edward is not down-stairs, sir," replied the valet.

　　"Then he must be playing in the garden; go and see."

　　"No, sir; Madame de Villefort sent for him half an hour ago;he went into her room, and has not been down-stairs since."A cold perspiration burst out on Villefort's brow; his legstrembled, and his thoughts flew about madly in his brainlike the wheels of a disordered watch. "In Madame deVillefort's room?" he murmured and slowly returned, with onehand wiping his forehead, and with the other supportinghimself against the wall. To enter the room he must againsee the body of his unfortunate wife. To call Edward he mustreawaken the echo of that room which now appeared like asepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the silence of thetomb. His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.

　　"Edward!" he stammered -- "Edward!" The child did notanswer. Where, then, could he be, if he had entered hismother's room and not since returned? He stepped forward.The corpse of Madame de Villefort was stretched across thedoorway leading to the room in which Edward must be; thoseglaring eyes seemed to watch over the threshold, and thelips bore the stamp of a terrible and mysterious irony.Through the open door was visible a portion of the boudoir,containing an upright piano and a blue satin couch.Villefort stepped forward two or three paces, and beheld hischild lying -- no doubt asleep -- on the sofa. The unhappyman uttered an exclamation of joy; a ray of light seemed topenetrate the abyss of despair and darkness. He had only tostep over the corpse, enter the boudoir, take the child inhis arms, and flee far, far away.

　　Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tigerhurt unto death, gnashing his teeth in his wound. He nolonger feared realities, but phantoms. He leaped over thecorpse as if it had been a burning brazier. He took thechild in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called him, butthe child made no response. He pressed his burning lips tothe cheeks, but they were icy cold and pale; he felt thestiffened limbs; he pressed his hand upon the heart, but itno longer beat, -- the child was dead. A folded paper fellfrom Edward's breast. Villefort, thunderstruck, fell uponhis knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled onthe floor by the side of its mother. He picked up the paper,and, recognizing his wife's writing, ran his eyes rapidlyover its contents; it ran as follows: --

　　"You know that I was a good mother, since it was for myson's sake I became criminal. A good mother cannot departwithout her son."

　　Villefort could not believe his eyes, -- he could notbelieve his reason; he dragged himself towards the child'sbody, and examined it as a lioness contemplates its deadcub. Then a piercing cry escaped from his breast, and hecried, "Still the hand of God." The presence of the twovictims alarmed him; he could not bear solitude shared onlyby two corpses. Until then he had been sustained by rage, byhis strength of mind, by despair, by the supreme agony whichled the Titans to scale the heavens, and Ajax to defy thegods. He now arose, his head bowed beneath the weight ofgrief, and, shaking his damp, dishevelled hair, he who hadnever felt compassion for any one determined to seek hisfather, that he might have some one to whom he could relatehis misfortunes, -- some one by whose side he might weep. Hedescended the little staircase with which we are acquainted,and entered Noirtier's room. The old man appeared to belistening attentively and as affectionately as hisinfirmities would allow to the Abbe Busoni, who looked coldand calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving the abbe, passedhis hand across his brow. He recollected the call he hadmade upon him after the dinner at Auteuil, and then thevisit the abbe had himself paid to his house on the day ofValentine's death. "You here, sir!" he exclaimed; "do you,then, never appear but to act as an escort to death?"

　　Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitementdepicted on the magistrate's face, the savage lustre of hiseyes, he understood that the revelation had been made at theassizes; but beyond this he was ignorant. "I came to prayover the body of your daughter."

　　"And now why are you here?"

　　"I come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid yourdebt, and that from this moment I will pray to God toforgive you, as I do."

　　"Good heavens!" exclaimed Villefort, stepping backfearfully, "surely that is not the voice of the AbbeBusoni!"

　　"No!" The abbe threw off his wig, shook his head, and hishair, no longer confined, fell in black masses around hismanly face.

　　"It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!" exclaimed theprocureur, with a haggard expression.

　　"You are not exactly right, M. Procureur; you must gofarther back."

　　"That voice, that voice! -- where did I first hear it?"

　　"You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-threeyears ago, the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle deSaint-Meran. Refer to your papers."

　　"You are not Busoni? -- you are not Monte Cristo? Oh,heavens -- you are, then, some secret, implacable, andmortal enemy! I must have wronged you in some way atMarseilles. Oh, woe to me!"

　　"Yes; you are now on the right path," said the count,crossing his arms over his broad chest; "search -- search!"

　　"But what have I done to you?" exclaimed Villefort, whosemind was balancing between reason and insanity, in thatcloud which is neither a dream nor reality; "what have Idone to you? Tell me, then! Speak!"

　　"You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killedmy father; you deprived me of liberty, of love, andhappiness."

　　"Who are you, then? Who are you?"

　　"I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons ofthe Chateau d'If. God gave that spectre the form of theCount of Monte Cristo when he at length issued from histomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds, and led him toyou!"

　　"Ah, I recognize you -- I recognize you!" exclaimed theking's attorney; "you are" --

　　"I am Edmond Dantes!"

　　"You are Edmond Dantes," cried Villefort, seizing the countby the wrist; "then come here!" And up the stairs he draggedMonte Cristo; who, ignorant of what had happened, followedhim in astonishment, foreseeing some new catastrophe."There, Edmond Dantes!" he said, pointing to the bodies ofhis wife and child, "see, are you well avenged?" MonteCristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that hehad passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he couldno longer say, "God is for and with me." With an expressionof indescribable anguish he threw himself upon the body ofthe child, reopened its eyes, felt its pulse, and thenrushed with him into Valentine's room, of which hedouble-locked the door. "My child," cried Villefort, "hecarries away the body of my child! Oh, curses, woe, death toyou!" and he tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though ina dream he was transfixed to the spot, -- his eyes glared asthough they were starting through the sockets; he griped theflesh on his chest until his nails were stained with blood;the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as though theywould burst their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain withliving fire. This lasted several minutes, until thefrightful overturn of reason was accomplished; then utteringa loud cry followed by a burst of laughter, he rushed downthe stairs.

　　A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine's roomopened, and Monte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eyeand heavy heart, all the noble features of that face,usually so calm and serene, were overcast by grief. In hisarms he held the child, whom no skill had been able torecall to life. Bending on one knee, he placed it reverentlyby the side of its mother, with its head upon her breast.Then, rising, he went out, and meeting a servant on thestairs, he asked, "Where is M. de Villefort?"

　　The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden.Monte Cristo ran down the steps, and advancing towards thespot designated beheld Villefort, encircled by his servants,with a spade in his hand, and digging the earth with fury."It is not here!" he cried. "It is not here!" And then hemoved farther on, and began again to dig.

　　Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, withan expression almost humble, "Sir, you have indeed lost ason; but" --

　　Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened norheard. "Oh, I will find it," he cried; "you may pretend heis not here, but I will find him, though I dig forever!"Monte Cristo drew back in horror. "Oh," he said, "he ismad!" And as though he feared that the walls of the accursedhouse would crumble around him, he rushed into the street,for the first time doubting whether he had the right to doas he had done. "Oh, enough of this, -- enough of this," hecried; "let me save the last." On entering his house, he metMorrel, who wandered about like a ghost awaiting theheavenly mandate for return to the tomb. "Prepare yourself,Maximilian," he said with a smile; "we leave Paristo-morrow."

　　"Have you nothing more to do there?" asked Morrel.

　　"No," replied Monte Cristo; "God grant I may not have donetoo much already."

　　The next day they indeed left, accompanied only byBaptistin. Haidee had taken away Ali, and Bertuccio remainedwith Noirtier.

　　Chapter 112The Departure.

　　The recent event formed the theme of conversation throughoutall Paris. Emmanuel and his wife conversed with naturalastonishment in their little apartment in the Rue Meslayupon the three successive, sudden, and most unexpectedcatastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and Villefort.Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to theirconversation, or rather was present at it, plunged in hisaccustomed state of apathy. "Indeed," said Julie, "might wenot almost fancy, Emmanuel, that those people, so rich, sohappy but yesterday, had forgotten in their prosperity thatan evil genius -- like the wicked fairies in Perrault'sstories who present themselves unbidden at a wedding orbaptism -- hovered over them, and appeared all at once torevenge himself for their fatal neglect?"

　　"What a dire misfortune!" said Emmanuel, thinking of Morcerfand Danglars.

　　"What dreadful sufferings!" said Julie, rememberingValentine, but whom, with a delicacy natural to women, shedid not name before her brother.

　　"If the Supreme Being has directed the fatal blow," saidEmmanuel, "it must be that he in his great goodness hasperceived nothing in the past lives of these people to meritmitigation of their awful punishment."

　　"Do you not form a very rash judgment, Emmanuel?" saidJulie. "When my father, with a pistol in his hand, was onceon the point of committing suicide, had any one then said,`This man deserves his misery,' would not that person havebeen deceived?"

　　"Yes; but your father was not allowed to fall. A being wascommissioned to arrest the fatal hand of death about todescend on him."

　　Emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound ofthe bell was heard, the well-known signal given by theporter that a visitor had arrived. Nearly at the sameinstant the door was opened and the Count of Monte Cristoappeared on the threshold. The young people uttered a cry ofjoy, while Maximilian raised his head, but let it fall againimmediately. "Maximilian," said the count, without appearingto notice the different impressions which his presenceproduced on the little circle, "I come to seek you."

　　"To seek me?" repeated Morrel, as if awakening from a dream.

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo; "has it not been agreed that Ishould take you with me, and did I not tell you yesterday toprepare for departure?"

　　"I am ready," said Maximilian; "I came expressly to wishthem farewell."

　　"Whither are you going, count?" asked Julie.

　　"In the first instance to Marseilles, madame."

　　"To Marseilles!" exclaimed the young couple.

　　"Yes, and I take your brother with me."

　　"Oh, count." said Julie, "will you restore him to us curedof his melancholy?" -- Morrel turned away to conceal theconfusion of his countenance.

　　"You perceive, then, that he is not happy?" said the count."Yes," replied the young woman; "and fear much that he findsour home but a dull one."

　　"I will undertake to divert him," replied the count.

　　"I am ready to accompany you, sir," said Maximilian. "Adieu,my kind friends! Emmanuel -- Julie -- farewell!"

　　"How farewell?" exclaimed Julie; "do you leave us thus, sosuddenly, without any preparations for your journey, withouteven a passport?"

　　"Needless delays but increase the grief of parting," saidMonte Cristo, "and Maximilian has doubtless provided himselfwith everything requisite; at least, I advised him to doso."

　　"I have a passport, and my clothes are ready packed," saidMorrel in his tranquil but mournful manner.

　　"Good," said Monte Cristo, smiling; "in these promptarrangements we recognize the order of a well-disciplinedsoldier."

　　"And you leave us," said Julie, "at a moment's warning? youdo not give us a day -- no, not even an hour before yourdeparture?"

　　"My carriage is at the door, madame, and I must be in Romein five days."

　　"But does Maximilian go to Rome?" exclaimed Emmanuel.

　　"I am going wherever it may please the count to take me,"said Morrel, with a smile full of grief; "I am under hisorders for the next month."

　　"Oh, heavens, how strangely he expresses himself, count!"said Julie.

　　"Maximilian goes with me," said the count, in his kindestand most persuasive manner; "therefore do not make yourselfuneasy on your brother's account."

　　"Once more farewell, my dear sister; Emmanuel, adieu!"Morrel repeated.

　　"His carelessness and indifference touch me to the heart,"said Julie. "Oh, Maximilian, Maximilian, you are certainlyconcealing something from us."

　　"Pshaw!" said Monte Cristo, "you will see him return to yougay, smiling, and joyful."

　　Maximilian cast a look of disdain, almost of anger, on thecount.

　　"We must leave you," said Monte Cristo.

　　"Before you quit us, count," said Julie, "will you permit usto express to you all that the other day" --

　　"Madame," interrupted the count, taking her two hands inhis, "all that you could say in words would never expresswhat I read in your eyes; the thoughts of your heart arefully understood by mine. Like benefactors in romances, Ishould have left you without seeing you again, but thatwould have been a virtue beyond my strength, because I am aweak and vain man, fond of the tender, kind, and thankfulglances of my fellow-creatures. On the eve of departure Icarry my egotism so far as to say, `Do not forget me, mykind friends, for probably you will never see me again.'"

　　"Never see you again?" exclaimed Emmanuel, while two largetears rolled down Julie's cheeks, "never behold you again?It is not a man, then, but some angel that leaves us, andthis angel is on the point of returning to heaven afterhaving appeared on earth to do good."

　　"Say not so," quickly returned Monte Cristo -- "say not so,my friends; angels never err, celestial beings remain wherethey wish to be. Fate is not more powerful than they; it isthey who, on the contrary, overcome fate. No, Emmanuel, I ambut a man, and your admiration is as unmerited as your wordsare sacrilegious." And pressing his lips on the hand ofJulie, who rushed into his arms, he extended his other handto Emmanuel; then tearing himself from this abode of peaceand happiness, he made a sign to Maximilian, who followedhim passively, with the indifference which had beenperceptible in him ever since the death of Valentine had sostunned him. "Restore my brother to peace and happiness,"whispered Julie to Monte Cristo. And the count pressed herhand in reply, as he had done eleven years before on thestaircase leading to Morrel's study.

　　"You still confide, then, in Sinbad the Sailor?" asked he,smiling.

　　"Oh, yes," was the ready answer.

　　"Well, then, sleep in peace, and put your trust in heaven."As we have before said, the postchaise was waiting; fourpowerful horses were already pawing the ground withimpatience, while Ali, apparently just arrived from a longwalk, was standing at the foot of the steps, his face bathedin perspiration. "Well," asked the count in Arabic, "haveyou been to see the old man?" Ali made a sign in theaffirmative.

　　"And have you placed the letter before him, as I ordered youto do?"

　　The slave respectfully signalized that he had. "And what didhe say, or rather do?" Ali placed himself in the light, sothat his master might see him distinctly, and then imitatingin his intelligent manner the countenance of the old man, heclosed his eyes, as Noirtier was in the custom of doing whensaying "Yes."

　　"Good; he accepts," said Monte Cristo. "Now let us go."

　　These words had scarcely escaped him, when the carriage wason its way, and the feet of the horses struck a shower ofsparks from the pavement. Maximilian settled himself in hiscorner without uttering a word. Half an hour had passed whenthe carriage stopped suddenly; the count had just pulled thesilken check-string, which was fastened to Ali's finger. TheNubian immediately descended and opened the carriage door.It was a lovely starlight night -- they had just reached thetop of the hill Villejuif, from whence Paris appears like asombre sea tossing its millions of phosphoric waves intolight -- waves indeed more noisy, more passionate, morechangeable, more furious, more greedy, than those of thetempestuous ocean, -- waves which never rest as those of thesea sometimes do, -- waves ever dashing, ever foaming, everingulfing what falls within their grasp. The count stoodalone, and at a sign from his hand, the carriage went on fora short distance. With folded arms, he gazed for some timeupon the great city. When he had fixed his piercing look onthis modern Babylon, which equally engages the contemplationof the religious enthusiast, the materialist, and thescoffer, -- "Great city," murmured he, inclining his head,and joining his hands as if in prayer, "less than six monthshave elapsed since first I entered thy gates. I believe thatthe Spirit of God led my steps to thee and that he alsoenables me to quit thee in triumph; the secret cause of mypresence within thy walls I have confided alone to him whoonly has had the power to read my heart. God only knows thatI retire from thee without pride or hatred, but not withoutmany regrets; he only knows that the power confided to mehas never been made subservient to my personal good or toany useless cause. Oh, great city, it is in thy palpitatingbosom that I have found that which I sought; like a patientminer, I have dug deep into thy very entrails to root outevil thence. Now my work is accomplished, my mission isterminated, now thou canst neither afford me pain norpleasure. Adieu, Paris, adieu!"

　　His look wandered over the vast plain like that of somegenius of the night; he passed his hand over his brow, gotinto the carriage, the door was closed on him, and thevehicle quickly disappeared down the other side of the hillin a whirlwind of noise and dust.

　　Ten leagues were passed and not a single word was uttered.

　　Morrel was dreaming, and Monte Cristo was looking at thedreamer.

　　"Morrel," said the count to him at length, "do you repenthaving followed me?"

　　"No, count; but to leave Paris" --

　　"If I thought happiness might await you in Paris, Morrel, Iwould have left you there."

　　"Valentine reposes within the walls of Paris, and to leaveParis is like losing her a second time."

　　"Maximilian," said the count, "the friends that we have lostdo not repose in the bosom of the earth, but are buried deepin our hearts, and it has been thus ordained that we mayalways be accompanied by them. I have two friends, who inthis way never depart from me; the one who gave me being,and the other who conferred knowledge and intelligence onme. Their spirits live in me. I consult them when doubtful,and if I ever do any good, it is due to their beneficentcounsels. Listen to the voice of your heart, Morrel, and askit whether you ought to preserve this melancholy exteriortowards me."

　　"My friend," said Maximilian, "the voice of my heart is verysorrowful, and promises me nothing but misfortune."

　　"It is the way of weakened minds to see everything through ablack cloud. The soul forms its own horizons; your soul isdarkened, and consequently the sky of the future appearsstormy and unpromising."

　　"That may possibly be true," said Maximilian, and he againsubsided into his thoughtful mood.

　　The journey was performed with that marvellous rapiditywhich the unlimited power of the count ever commanded. Townsfled from them like shadows on their path, and trees shakenby the first winds of autumn seemed like giants madlyrushing on to meet them, and retreating as rapidly when oncereached. The following morning they arrived at Chalons,where the count's steamboat waited for them. Without theloss of an instant, the carriage was placed on board and thetwo travellers embarked without delay. The boat was builtfor speed; her two paddle-wheels were like two wings withwhich she skimmed the water like a bird. Morrel was notinsensible to that sensation of delight which is generallyexperienced in passing rapidly through the air, and the windwhich occasionally raised the hair from his forehead seemedon the point of dispelling momentarily the clouds collectedthere.

　　As the distance increased between the travellers and Paris,almost superhuman serenity appeared to surround the count;he might have been taken for an exile about to revisit hisnative land. Ere long Marseilles presented herself to view,-- Marseilles, white, fervid, full of life and energy, --Marseilles, the younger sister of Tyre and Carthage, thesuccessor to them in the empire of the Mediterranean, --Marseilles, old, yet always young. Powerful memories werestirred within them by the sight of the round tower, FortSaint-Nicolas, the City Hall designed by Puget,* the portwith its brick quays, where they had both played inchildhood, and it was with one accord that they stopped onthe Cannebiere. A vessel was setting sail for Algiers, onboard of which the bustle usually attending departureprevailed. The passengers and their relations crowded on thedeck, friends taking a tender but sorrowful leave of eachother, some weeping, others noisy in their grief, the wholeforming a spectacle that might be exciting even to those whowitnessed similar sights daily, but which had no power todisturb the current of thought that had taken possession ofthe mind of Maximilian from the moment he had set foot onthe broad pavement of the quay.

　　* Pierre Puget, the sculptor-architect, was born atMarseilles in 1622.

　　"Here," said he, leaning heavily on the arm of Monte Cristo,-- "here is the spot where my father stopped, when thePharaon entered the port; it was here that the good old man,whom you saved from death and dishonor, threw himself intomy arms. I yet feel his warm tears on my face, and his werenot the only tears shed, for many who witnessed our meetingwept also." Monte Cristo gently smiled and said, -- "I wasthere;" at the same time pointing to the corner of a street.As he spoke, and in the very direction he indicated, agroan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard, and a womanwas seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the vesselabout to sail. Monte Cristo looked at her with an emotionthat must have been remarked by Morrel had not his eyes beenfixed on the vessel.

　　"Oh, heavens!" exclaimed Morrel, "I do not deceive myself --that young man who is waving his hat, that youth in theuniform of a lieutenant, is Albert de Morcerf!"

　　"Yes," said Monte Cristo, "I recognized him."

　　"How so? -- you were looking the other way." the countsmiled, as he was in the habit of doing when he did not wantto make any reply, and he again turned towards the veiledwoman, who soon disappeared at the corner of the street.Turning to his friend, -- "Dear Maximilian," said the count,"have you nothing to do in this land?"

　　"I have to weep over the grave of my father," replied Morrelin a broken voice.

　　"Well, then, go, -- wait for me there, and I will soon joinyou."

　　"You leave me, then?"

　　"Yes; I also have a pious visit to pay."

　　Morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the countextended to him; then with an inexpressibly sorrowfulinclination of the head he quitted the count and bent hissteps to the east of the city. Monte Cristo remained on thesame spot until Maximilian was out of sight; he then walkedslowly towards the Allees de Meillan to seek out a smallhouse with which our readers were made familiar at thebeginning of this story. It yet stood, under the shade ofthe fine avenue of lime-trees, which forms one of the mostfrequent walks of the idlers of Marseilles, covered by animmense vine, which spreads its aged and blackened branchesover the stone front, burnt yellow by the ardent sun of thesouth. Two stone steps worn away by the friction of manyfeet led to the door, which was made of three planks; thedoor had never been painted or varnished, so great cracksyawned in it during the dry season to close again when therains came on. The house, with all its crumbling antiquityand apparent misery, was yet cheerful and picturesque, andwas the same that old Dantes formerly inhabited -- the onlydifference being that the old man occupied merely thegarret, while the whole house was now placed at the commandof Mercedes by the count.

　　The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with somuch regret entered this house; she had scarcely closed thedoor after her when Monte Cristo appeared at the corner of astreet, so that he found and lost her again almost at thesame instant. The worn out steps were old acquaintances ofhis; he knew better than any one else how to open thatweather-beaten door with the large headed nail which servedto raise the latch within. He entered without knocking, orgiving any other intimation of his presence, as if he hadbeen a friend or the master of the place. At the end of apassage paved with bricks, was a little garden, bathed insunshine, and rich in warmth and light. In this gardenMercedes had found, at the place indicated by the count, thesum of money which he, through a sense of delicacy, haddescribed as having been placed there twenty-four yearspreviously. The trees of the garden were easily seen fromthe steps of the street-door. Monte Cristo, on stepping intothe house, heard a sigh that was almost a deep sob; helooked in the direction whence it came, and there under anarbor of Virginia jessamine,* with its thick foliage andbeautiful long purple flowers, he saw Mercedes seated, withher head bowed, and weeping bitterly. She had raised herveil, and with her face hidden by her hands was giving freescope to the sighs and tears which had been so longrestrained by the presence of her son. Monte Cristo advanceda few steps, which were heard on the gravel. Mercedes raisedher head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a manbefore her.

　　* The Carolina -- not Virginia -- jessamine, gelsemiumsempervirens (properly speaking not a jessamine at all) hasyellow blossoms. The reference is no doubt to the Wistariafrutescens. -- Ed.

　　"Madame," said the count, "it is no longer in my power torestore you to happiness, but I offer you consolation; willyou deign to accept it as coming from a friend?"

　　"I am, indeed, most wretched," replied Mercedes. "Alone inthe world, I had but my son, and he has left me!"

　　"He possesses a noble heart, madame," replied the count,"and he has acted rightly. He feels that every man owes atribute to his country; some contribute their talents,others their industry; these devote their blood, those theirnightly labors, to the same cause. Had he remained with you,his life must have become a hateful burden, nor would hehave participated in your griefs. He will increase instrength and honor by struggling with adversity, which hewill convert into prosperity. Leave him to build up thefuture for you, and I venture to say you will confide it tosafe hands."

　　"Oh," replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking herhead, "the prosperity of which you speak, and which, fromthe bottom of my heart, I pray God in his mercy to granthim, I can never enjoy. The bitter cup of adversity has beendrained by me to the very dregs, and I feel that the graveis not far distant. You have acted kindly, count, inbringing me back to the place where I have enjoyed so muchbliss. I ought to meet death on the same spot wherehappiness was once all my own."

　　"Alas," said Monte Cristo, "your words sear and embitter myheart, the more so as you have every reason to hate me. Ihave been the cause of all your misfortunes; but why do youpity, instead of blaming me? You render me still moreunhappy" --

　　"Hate you, blame you -- you, Edmond! Hate, reproach, the manthat has spared my son's life! For was it not your fatal andsanguinary intention to destroy that son of whom M. deMorcerf was so proud? Oh, look at me closely, and discoverif you can even the semblance of a reproach in me." Thecount looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercedes, who arosepartly from her seat and extended both her hands towardshim. "Oh, look at me," continued she, with a feeling ofprofound melancholy, "my eyes no longer dazzle by theirbrilliancy, for the time has long fled since I used to smileon Edmond Dantes, who anxiously looked out for me from thewindow of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old father.Years of grief have created an abyss between those days andthe present. I neither reproach you nor hate you, my friend.Oh, no, Edmond, it is myself that I blame, myself that Ihate! Oh, miserable creature that I am!" cried she, claspingher hands, and raising her eyes to heaven. "I once possessedpiety, innocence, and love, the three ingredients of thehappiness of angels, and now what am I?" Monte Cristoapproached her, and silently took her hand. "No," said she,withdrawing it gently -- "no, my friend, touch me not. Youhave spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under yourvengeance I was the most guilty. They were influenced byhatred, by avarice, and by self-love; but I was base, andfor want of courage acted against my judgment. Nay, do notpress my hand, Edmond; you are thinking, I am sure, of somekind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me,reserve it for others more worthy of your kindness. See"(and she exposed her face completely to view) -- "see,misfortune has silvered my hair, my eyes have shed so manytears that they are encircled by a rim of purple, and mybrow is wrinkled. You, Edmond, on the contrary, -- you arestill young, handsome, dignified; it is because you have hadfaith; because you have had strength, because you have hadtrust in God, and God has sustained you. But as for me, Ihave been a coward; I have denied God and he has abandonedme."

　　Mercedes burst into tears; her woman's heart was breakingunder its load of memories. Monte Cristo took her hand andimprinted a kiss on it; but she herself felt that it was akiss of no greater warmth than he would have bestowed on thehand of some marble statue of a saint. "It often happens,"continued she, "that a first fault destroys the prospects ofa whole life. I believed you dead; why did I survive you?What good has it done me to mourn for you eternally in thesecret recesses of my heart? -- only to make a woman ofthirty-nine look like a woman of fifty. Why, havingrecognized you, and I the only one to do so -- why was Iable to save my son alone? Ought I not also to have rescuedthe man that I had accepted for a husband, guilty though hewere? Yet I let him die! What do I say? Oh, mercifulheavens, was I not accessory to his death by my supineinsensibility, by my contempt for him, not remembering, ornot willing to remember, that it was for my sake he hadbecome a traitor and a perjurer? In what am I benefited byaccompanying my son so far, since I now abandon him, andallow him to depart alone to the baneful climate of Africa?Oh, I have been base, cowardly, I tell you; I have abjuredmy affections, and like all renegades I am of evil omen tothose who surround me!"

　　"No, Mercedes," said Monte Cristo, "no; you judge yourselfwith too much severity. You are a noble-minded woman, and itwas your grief that disarmed me. Still I was but an agent,led on by an invisible and offended Deity, who chose not towithhold the fatal blow that I was destined to hurl. I takethat God to witness, at whose feet I have prostrated myselfdaily for the last ten years, that I would have sacrificedmy life to you, and with my life the projects that wereindissolubly linked with it. But -- and I say it with somepride, Mercedes -- God needed me, and I lived. Examine thepast and the present, and endeavor to dive into futurity,and then say whether I am not a divine instrument. The mostdreadful misfortunes, the most frightful sufferings, theabandonment of all those who loved me, the persecution ofthose who did not know me, formed the trials of my youth;when suddenly, from captivity, solitude, misery, I wasrestored to light and liberty, and became the possessor of afortune so brilliant, so unbounded, so unheard-of, that Imust have been blind not to be conscious that God hadendowed me with it to work out his own great designs. Fromthat time I looked upon this fortune as something confidedto me for an especial purpose. Not a thought was given to alife which you once, Mercedes, had the power to renderblissful; not one hour of peaceful calm was mine; but I feltmyself driven on like an exterminating angel. Likeadventurous captains about to embark on some enterprise fullof danger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my weapons, Icollected every means of attack and defence; I inured mybody to the most violent exercises, my soul to the bitteresttrials; I taught my arm to slay, my eyes to beholdexcruciating sufferings, and my mouth to smile at the mosthorrid spectacles. Good-natured, confiding, and forgiving asI had been, I became revengeful, cunning, and wicked, orrather, immovable as fate. Then I launched out into the paththat was opened to me. I overcame every obstacle, andreached the goal; but woe to those who stood in my pathway!"

　　"Enough," said Mercedes; "enough, Edmond! Believe me, thatshe who alone recognized you has been the only one tocomprehend you; and had she crossed your path, and you hadcrushed her like glass, still, Edmond, still she must haveadmired you! Like the gulf between me and the past, there isan abyss between you, Edmond, and the rest of mankind; and Itell you freely that the comparison I draw between you andother men will ever be one of my greatest tortures. No,there is nothing in the world to resemble you in worth andgoodness! But we must say farewell, Edmond, and let uspart."

　　"Before I leave you, Mercedes, have you no request to make?"said the count.

　　"I desire but one thing in this world, Edmond, -- thehappiness of my son."

　　"Pray to the Almighty to spare his life, and I will takeupon myself to promote his happiness."

　　"Thank you, Edmond."

　　"But have you no request to make for yourself, Mercedes?"

　　"For myself I want nothing. I live, as it were, between twograves. One is that of Edmond Dantes, lost to me long, longsince. He had my love! That word ill becomes my faded lipnow, but it is a memory dear to my heart, and one that Iwould not lose for all that the world contains. The othergrave is that of the man who met his death from the hand ofEdmond Dantes. I approve of the deed, but I must pray forthe dead."

　　"Your son shall be happy, Mercedes," repeated the count.

　　"Then I shall enjoy as much happiness as this world canpossibly confer."

　　"But what are your intentions?"

　　"To say that I shall live here, like the Mercedes of othertimes, gaining my bread by labor, would not be true, norwould you believe me. I have no longer the strength to doanything but to spend my days in prayer. However, I shallhave no occasion to work, for the little sum of money buriedby you, and which I found in the place you mentioned, willbe sufficient to maintain me. Rumor will probably be busyrespecting me, my occupations, my manner of living -- thatwill signify but little."

　　"Mercedes," said the count, "I do not say it to blame you,but you made an unnecessary sacrifice in relinquishing thewhole of the fortune amassed by M. de Morcerf; half of it atleast by right belonged to you, in virtue of your vigilanceand economy."

　　"I perceive what you are intending to propose to me; but Icannot accept it, Edmond -- my son would not permit it."

　　"Nothing shall be done without the full approbation ofAlbert de Morcerf. I will make myself acquainted with hisintentions and will submit to them. But if he be willing toaccept my offers, will you oppose them?"

　　"You well know, Edmond, that I am no longer a reasoningcreature; I have no will, unless it be the will never todecide. I have been so overwhelmed by the many storms thathave broken over my head, that I am become passive in thehands of the Almighty, like a sparrow in the talons of aneagle. I live, because it is not ordained for me to die. Ifsuccor be sent to me, I will accept it."

　　"Ah, madame," said Monte Cristo, "you should not talk thus!It is not so we should evince our resignation to the will ofheaven; on the contrary, we are all free agents."

　　"Alas!" exclaimed Mercedes, "if it were so, if I possessedfree-will, but without the power to render that willefficacious, it would drive me to despair." Monte Cristodropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her grief."Will you not even say you will see me again?" he asked.

　　"On the contrary, we shall meet again," said Mercedes,pointing to heaven with solemnity. "I tell you so to proveto you that I still hope." And after pressing her owntrembling hand upon that of the count, Mercedes rushed upthe stairs and disappeared. Monte Cristo slowly left thehouse and turned towards the quay. But Mercedes did notwitness his departure, although she was seated at the littlewindow of the room which had been occupied by old Dantes.Her eyes were straining to see the ship which was carryingher son over the vast sea; but still her voice involuntarilymurmured softly, "Edmond, Edmond, Edmond!"

　　Chapter 113The Past.

　　The count departed with a sad heart from the house in whichhe had left Mercedes, probably never to behold her again.Since the death of little Edward a great change had takenplace in Monte Cristo. Having reached the summit of hisvengeance by a long and tortuous path, he saw an abyss ofdoubt yawning before him. More than this, the conversationwhich had just taken place between Mercedes and himself hadawakened so many recollections in his heart that he felt itnecessary to combat with them. A man of the count'stemperament could not long indulge in that melancholy whichcan exist in common minds, but which destroys superior ones.He thought he must have made an error in his calculations ifhe now found cause to blame himself.

　　"I cannot have deceived myself," he said; "I must look uponthe past in a false light. What!" he continued, "can I havebeen following a false path? -- can the end which I proposedbe a mistaken end? -- can one hour have sufficed to prove toan architect that the work upon which he founded all hishopes was an impossible, if not a sacrilegious, undertaking?I cannot reconcile myself to this idea -- it would maddenme. The reason why I am now dissatisfied is that I have nota clear appreciation of the past. The past, like the countrythrough which we walk, becomes indistinct as we advance. Myposition is like that of a person wounded in a dream; hefeels the wound, though he cannot recollect when he receivedit. Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagantprodigal, thou awakened sleeper, thou all-powerfulvisionary, thou invincible millionaire, -- once again reviewthy past life of starvation and wretchedness, revisit thescenes where fate and misfortune conducted, and wheredespair received thee. Too many diamonds, too much gold andsplendor, are now reflected by the mirror in which MonteCristo seeks to behold Dantes. Hide thy diamonds, bury thygold, shroud thy splendor, exchange riches for poverty,liberty for a prison, a living body for a corpse!" As hethus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de laCaisserie. It was the same through which, twenty-four yearsago, he had been conducted by a silent and nocturnal guard;the houses, to-day so smiling and animated, were on thatnight dark, mute, and closed. "And yet they were the same,"murmured Monte Cristo, "only now it is broad daylightinstead of night; it is the sun which brightens the place,and makes it appear so cheerful."

　　He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent, andadvanced to the Consigne; it was the point where he hadembarked. A pleasure-boat with striped awning was going by.Monte Cristo called the owner, who immediately rowed up tohim with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for a good fare.The weather was magnificent, and the excursion a treat.

　　The sun, red and flaming, was sinking into the embrace ofthe welcoming ocean. The sea, smooth as crystal, was now andthen disturbed by the leaping of fish, which were pursued bysome unseen enemy and sought for safety in another element;while on the extreme verge of the horizon might be seen thefishermen's boats, white and graceful as the sea-gull, orthe merchant vessels bound for Corsica or Spain.

　　But notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formedboats, and the golden light in which the whole scene wasbathed, the Count of Monte Cristo, wrapped in his cloak,could think only of this terrible voyage, the details ofwhich were one by one recalled to his memory. The solitarylight burning at the Catalans; that first sight of theChateau d'If, which told him whither they were leading him;the struggle with the gendarmes when he wished to throwhimself overboard; his despair when he found himselfvanquished, and the sensation when the muzzle of the carbinetouched his forehead -- all these were brought before him invivid and frightful reality. Like the streams which the heatof the summer has dried up, and which after the autumnalstorms gradually begin oozing drop by drop, so did the countfeel his heart gradually fill with the bitterness whichformerly nearly overwhelmed Edmond Dantes. Clear sky,swift-flitting boats, and brilliant sunshine disappeared;the heavens were hung with black, and the gigantic structureof the Chateau d'If seemed like the phantom of a mortalenemy. As they reached the shore, the count instinctivelyshrunk to the extreme end of the boat, and the owner wasobliged to call out, in his sweetest tone of voice, "Sir, weare at the landing."

　　Monte Cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the samerock, he had been violently dragged by the guards, whoforced him to ascend the slope at the points of theirbayonets. The journey had seemed very long to Dantes, butMonte Cristo found it equally short. Each stroke of the oarseemed to awaken a new throng of ideas, which sprang up withthe flying spray of the sea.

　　There had been no prisoners confined in the Chateau d'Ifsince the revolution of July; it was only inhabited by aguard, kept there for the prevention of smuggling. Aconcierge waited at the door to exhibit to visitors thismonument of curiosity, once a scene of terror. The countinquired whether any of the ancient jailers were stillthere; but they had all been pensioned, or had passed on tosome other employment. The concierge who attended him hadonly been there since 1830. He visited his own dungeon. Heagain beheld the dull light vainly endeavoring to penetratethe narrow opening. His eyes rested upon the spot where hadstood his bed, since then removed, and behind the bed thenew stones indicated where the breach made by the Abbe Fariahad been. Monte Cristo felt his limbs tremble; he seatedhimself upon a log of wood.

　　"Are there any stories connected with this prison besidesthe one relating to the poisoning of Mirabeau?" asked thecount; "are there any traditions respecting these dismalabodes, -- in which it is difficult to believe men can everhave imprisoned their fellow-creatures?"

　　"Yes, sir; indeed, the jailer Antoine told me one connectedwith this very dungeon."

　　Monte Cristo shuddered; Antoine had been his jailer. He hadalmost forgotten his name and face, but at the mention ofthe name he recalled his person as he used to see it, theface encircled by a beard, wearing the brown jacket, thebunch of keys, the jingling of which he still seemed tohear. The count turned around, and fancied he saw him in thecorridor, rendered still darker by the torch carried by theconcierge. "Would you like to hear the story, sir?"

　　"Yes; relate it," said Monte Cristo, pressing his hand tohis heart to still its violent beatings; he felt afraid ofhearing his own history.

　　"This dungeon," said the concierge, "was, it appears, sometime ago occupied by a very dangerous prisoner, the more sosince he was full of industry. Another person was confinedin the Chateau at the same time, but he was not wicked, hewas only a poor mad priest."

　　"Ah, indeed? -- mad!" repeated Monte Cristo; "and what washis mania?"

　　"He offered millions to any one who would set him atliberty."

　　Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see theheavens; there was a stone veil between him and thefirmament. He thought that there had been no less thick aveil before the eyes of those to whom Faria offered thetreasures. "Could the prisoners see each other?" he asked.

　　"Oh, no, sir, it was expressly forbidden; but they eludedthe vigilance of the guards, and made a passage from onedungeon to the other."

　　"And which of them made this passage?"

　　"Oh, it must have been the young man, certainly, for he wasstrong and industrious, while the abbe was aged and weak;besides, his mind was too vacillating to allow him to carryout an idea."

　　"Blind fools!" murmured the count.

　　"However, be that as it may, the young man made a tunnel,how or by what means no one knows; but he made it, and thereis the evidence yet remaining of his work. Do you see it?"and the man held the torch to the wall.

　　"Ah, yes; I see," said the count, in a voice hoarse fromemotion.

　　"The result was that the two men communicated with oneanother; how long they did so, nobody knows. One day the oldman fell ill and died. Now guess what the young one did?"

　　"Tell me."

　　"He carried off the corpse, which he placed in his own bedwith its face to the wall; then he entered the emptydungeon, closed the entrance, and slipped into the sackwhich had contained the dead body. Did you ever hear of suchan idea?" Monte Cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again toexperience all the sensations he had felt when the coarsecanvas, yet moist with the cold dews of death, had touchedhis face. The jailer continued: "Now this was his project.He fancied that they buried the dead at the Chateau d'If,and imagining they would not expend much labor on the graveof a prisoner, he calculated on raising the earth with hisshoulders, but unfortunately their arrangements at theChateau frustrated his projects. They never buried the dead;they merely attached a heavy cannon-ball to the feet, andthen threw them into the sea. This is what was done. Theyoung man was thrown from the top of the rock; the corpsewas found on the bed next day, and the whole truth wasguessed, for the men who performed the office then mentionedwhat they had not dared to speak of before, that at themoment the corpse was thrown into the deep, they heard ashriek, which was almost immediately stifled by the water inwhich it disappeared." The count breathed with difficulty;the cold drops ran down his forehead, and his heart was fullof anguish.

　　"No," he muttered, "the doubt I felt was but thecommencement of forgetfulness; but here the wound reopens,and the heart again thirsts for vengeance. And theprisoner," he continued aloud, "was he ever heard ofafterwards?"

　　"Oh, no; of course not. You can understand that one of twothings must have happened; he must either have fallen flat,in which case the blow, from a height of ninety feet, musthave killed him instantly, or he must have fallen upright,and then the weight would have dragged him to the bottom,where he remained -- poor fellow!"

　　"Then you pity him?" said the count.

　　"Ma foi, yes; though he was in his own element."

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"The report was that he had been a naval officer, who hadbeen confined for plotting with the Bonapartists."

　　"Great is truth," muttered the count, "fire cannot burn, norwater drown it! Thus the poor sailor lives in therecollection of those who narrate his history; his terriblestory is recited in the chimney-corner, and a shudder isfelt at the description of his transit through the air to beswallowed by the deep." Then, the count added aloud, "Washis name ever known?"

　　"Oh, yes; but only as No. 34."

　　"Oh, Villefort, Villefort," murmured the count, "this scenemust often have haunted thy sleepless hours!"

　　"Do you wish to see anything more, sir?" said the concierge.

　　"Yes, especially if you will show me the poor abbe's room."

　　"Ah -- No. 27."

　　"Yes; No. 27." repeated the count, who seemed to hear thevoice of the abbe answering him in those very words throughthe wall when asked his name.

　　"Come, sir."

　　"Wait," said Monte Cristo, "I wish to take one final glancearound this room."

　　"This is fortunate," said the guide; "I have forgotten theother key."

　　"Go and fetch it."

　　"I will leave you the torch, sir."

　　"No, take it away; I can see in the dark."

　　"Why, you are like No. 34. They said he was so accustomed todarkness that he could see a pin in the darkest corner ofhis dungeon."

　　"He spent fourteen years to arrive at that," muttered thecount.

　　The guide carried away the torch. The count had spokencorrectly. Scarcely had a few seconds elapsed, ere he saweverything as distinctly as by daylight. Then he lookedaround him, and really recognized his dungeon.

　　"Yes," he said, "there is the stone upon which I used tosit; there is the impression made by my shoulders on thewall; there is the mark of my blood made when one day Idashed my head against the wall. Oh, those figures, how wellI remember them! I made them one day to calculate the age ofmy father, that I might know whether I should find him stillliving, and that of Mercedes, to know if I should find herstill free. After finishing that calculation, I had aminute's hope. I did not reckon upon hunger and infidelity!"and a bitter laugh escaped the count. He saw in fancy theburial of his father, and the marriage of Mercedes. On theother side of the dungeon he perceived an inscription, thewhite letters of which were still visible on the green wall."`O God,'" he read, "`preserve my memory!' Oh, yes," hecried, "that was my only prayer at last; I no longer beggedfor liberty, but memory; I dreaded to become mad andforgetful. O God, thou hast preserved my memory; I thankthee, I thank thee!" At this moment the light of the torchwas reflected on the wall; the guide was coming; MonteCristo went to meet him.

　　"Follow me, sir;" and without ascending the stairs the guideconducted him by a subterraneous passage to anotherentrance. There, again, Monte Cristo was assailed by amultitude of thoughts. The first thing that met his eye wasthe meridian, drawn by the abbe on the wall, by which hecalculated the time; then he saw the remains of the bed onwhich the poor prisoner had died. The sight of this, insteadof exciting the anguish experienced by the count in thedungeon, filled his heart with a soft and gratefulsentiment, and tears fell from his eyes.

　　"This is where the mad abbe was kept, sir, and that is wherethe young man entered; "and the guide pointed to theopening, which had remained unclosed. "From the appearanceof the stone," he continued, "a learned gentleman discoveredthat the prisoners might have communicated together for tenyears. Poor things! Those must have been ten weary years."

　　Dantes took some louis from his pocket, and gave them to theman who had twice unconsciously pitied him. The guide tookthem, thinking them merely a few pieces of little value; butthe light of the torch revealed their true worth. "Sir," hesaid, "you have made a mistake; you have given me gold."

　　"I know it." The concierge looked upon the count withsurprise. "Sir," he cried, scarcely able to believe his goodfortune -- "sir, I cannot understand your generosity!"

　　"Oh, it is very simple, my good fellow; I have been asailor, and your story touched me more than it wouldothers."

　　"Then, sir, since you are so liberal, I ought to offer yousomething."

　　"What have you to offer to me, my friend? Shells?Straw-work? Thank you!"

　　"No, sir, neither of those; something connected with thisstory."

　　"Really? What is it?"

　　"Listen," said the guide; "I said to myself, `Something isalways left in a cell inhabited by one prisoner for fifteenyears,' so I began to sound the wall."

　　"Ah," cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbe's twohiding-places.

　　"After some search, I found that the floor gave a hollowsound near the head of the bed, and at the hearth."

　　"Yes," said the count, "yes."

　　"I raised the stones, and found" --

　　"A rope-ladder and some tools?"

　　"How do you know that?" asked the guide in astonishment.

　　"I do not know -- I only guess it, because that sort ofthing is generally found in prisoners' cells."

　　"Yes, sir, a rope-ladder and tools."

　　"And have you them yet?"

　　"No, sir; I sold them to visitors, who considered them greatcuriosities; but I have still something left."

　　"What is it?" asked the count, impatiently.

　　"A sort of book, written upon strips of cloth."

　　"Go and fetch it, my good fellow; and if it be what I hope,you will do well."

　　"I will run for it, sir;" and the guide went out. Then thecount knelt down by the side of the bed, which death hadconverted into an altar. "Oh, second father," he exclaimed,"thou who hast given me liberty, knowledge, riches; thouwho, like beings of a superior order to ourselves, couldstunderstand the science of good and evil; if in the depths ofthe tomb there still remain something within us which canrespond to the voice of those who are left on earth; ifafter death the soul ever revisit the places where we havelived and suffered, -- then, noble heart, sublime soul, thenI conjure thee by the paternal love thou didst bear me, bythe filial obedience I vowed to thee, grant me some sign,some revelation! Remove from me the remains of doubt, which,if it change not to conviction, must become remorse!" Thecount bowed his head, and clasped his hands together.

　　"Here, sir," said a voice behind him.

　　Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose. The concierge held outthe strips of cloth upon which the Abbe Faria had spread theriches of his mind. The manuscript was the great work by theAbbe Faria upon the kingdoms of Italy. The count seized ithastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the epigraph, and heread, "`Thou shalt tear out the dragons' teeth, and shalltrample the lions under foot, saith the Lord.'"

　　"Ah," he exclaimed, "here is my answer. Thanks, father,thanks." And feeling in his pocket, he took thence a smallpocket-book, which contained ten bank-notes, each of 1,000francs.

　　"Here," he said, "take this pocket-book."

　　"Do you give it to me?"

　　"Yes; but only on condition that you will not open it till Iam gone;" and placing in his breast the treasure he had justfound, which was more valuable to him than the richestjewel, he rushed out of the corridor, and reaching his boat,cried, "To Marseilles!" Then, as he departed, he fixed hiseyes upon the gloomy prison. "Woe," he cried, "to those whoconfined me in that wretched prison; and woe to those whoforgot that I was there!" As he repassed the Catalans, thecount turned around and burying his head in his cloakmurmured the name of a woman. The victory was complete;twice he had overcome his doubts. The name he pronounced, ina voice of tenderness, amounting almost to love, was that ofHaidee.

　　On landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where hefelt sure of finding Morrel. He, too, ten years ago, hadpiously sought out a tomb, and sought it vainly. He, whoreturned to France with millions, had been unable to findthe grave of his father, who had perished from hunger.Morrel had indeed placed a cross over the spot, but it hadfallen down and the grave-digger had burnt it, as he did allthe old wood in the churchyard. The worthy merchant had beenmore fortunate. Dying in the arms of his children, he hadbeen by them laid by the side of his wife, who had precededhim in eternity by two years. Two large slabs of marble, onwhich were inscribed their names, were placed on either sideof a little enclosure, railed in, and shaded by fourcypress-trees. Morrel was leaning against one of these,mechanically fixing his eyes on the graves. His grief was soprofound that he was nearly unconscious. "Maximilian," saidthe count, "you should not look on the graves, but there;"and he pointed upwards.

　　"The dead are everywhere," said Morrel; "did you notyourself tell me so as we left Paris?"

　　"Maximilian," said the count, "you asked me during thejourney to allow you to remain some days at Marseilles. Doyou still wish to do so?"

　　"I have no wishes, count; only I fancy I could pass the timeless painfully here than anywhere else."

　　"So much the better, for I must leave you; but I carry yourword with me, do I not?"

　　"Ah, count, I shall forget it."

　　"No, you will not forget it, because you are a man of honor,Morrel, because you have taken an oath, and are about to doso again."

　　"Oh, count, have pity upon me. I am so unhappy."

　　"I have known a man much more unfortunate than you, Morrel."

　　"Impossible!"

　　"Alas," said Monte Cristo, "it is the infirmity of ournature always to believe ourselves much more unhappy thanthose who groan by our sides!"

　　"What can be more wretched than the man who has lost all heloved and desired in the world?"

　　"Listen, Morrel, and pay attention to what I am about totell you. I knew a man who like you had fixed all his hopesof happiness upon a woman. He was young, he had an oldfather whom he loved, a betrothed bride whom he adored. Hewas about to marry her, when one of the caprices of fate, --which would almost make us doubt the goodness of providence,if that providence did not afterwards reveal itself byproving that all is but a means of conducting to an end, --one of those caprices deprived him of his mistress, of thefuture of which he had dreamed (for in his blindness heforgot he could only read the present), and cast him into adungeon."

　　"Ah," said Morrel, "one quits a dungeon in a week, a month,or a year."

　　"He remained there fourteen years, Morrel," said the count,placing his hand on the young man's shoulder. Maximilianshuddered.

　　"Fourteen years!" he muttered -- "Fourteen years!" repeatedthe count. "During that time he had many moments of despair.He also, Morrel, like you, considered himself the unhappiestof men."

　　"Well?" asked Morrel.

　　"Well, at the height of his despair God assisted him throughhuman means. At first, perhaps, he did not recognize theinfinite mercy of the Lord, but at last he took patience andwaited. One day he miraculously left the prison,transformed, rich, powerful. His first cry was for hisfather; but that father was dead."

　　"My father, too, is dead," said Morrel.

　　"Yes; but your father died in your arms, happy, respected,rich, and full of years; his father died poor, despairing,almost doubtful of providence; and when his son sought hisgrave ten years afterwards, his tomb had disappeared, and noone could say, `There sleeps the father you so well loved.'"

　　"Oh!" exclaimed Morrel.

　　"He was, then, a more unhappy son than you, Morrel, for hecould not even find his father's grave."

　　"But then he had the woman he loved still remaining?"

　　"You are deceived, Morrel, that woman" --

　　"She was dead?"

　　"Worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one ofthe persecutors of her betrothed. You see, then, Morrel,that he was a more unhappy lover than you."

　　"And has he found consolation?"

　　"He has at least found peace."

　　"And does he ever expect to be happy?"

　　"He hopes so, Maximilian." The young man's head fell on hisbreast.

　　"You have my promise," he said, after a minute's pause,extending his hand to Monte Cristo. "Only remember" --

　　"On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at theIsland of Monte Cristo. On the 4th a yacht will wait for youin the port of Bastia, it will be called the Eurus. You willgive your name to the captain, who will bring you to me. Itis understood -- is it not?"

　　"But, count, do you remember that the 5th of October" --

　　"Child," replied the count, "not to know the value of aman's word! I have told you twenty times that if you wish todie on that day, I will assist you. Morrel, farewell!"

　　"Do you leave me?"

　　"Yes; I have business in Italy. I leave you alone with yourmisfortunes, and with hope, Maximilian."

　　"When do you leave?"

　　"Immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour I shall befar from you. Will you accompany me to the harbor,Maximilian?"

　　"I am entirely yours, count." Morrel accompanied the countto the harbor. The white steam was ascending like a plume offeathers from the black chimney. The steamer soondisappeared, and in an hour afterwards, as the count hadsaid, was scarcely distinguishable in the horizon amidst thefogs of the night.

　　Chapter 114Peppino.

　　At the same time that the steamer disappeared behind CapeMorgion, a man travelling post on the road from Florence toRome had just passed the little town of Aquapendente. He wastravelling fast enough to cover a great deal of groundwithout exciting suspicion. This man was dressed in agreatcoat, or rather a surtout, a little worse for thejourney, but which exhibited the ribbon of the Legion ofHonor still fresh and brilliant, a decoration which alsoornamented the under coat. He might be recognized, not onlyby these signs, but also from the accent with which he spoketo the postilion, as a Frenchman. Another proof that he wasa native of the universal country was apparent in the factof his knowing no other Italian words than the terms used inmusic, and which like the "goddam" of Figaro, served allpossible linguistic requirements. "Allegro!" he called outto the postilions at every ascent. "Moderato!" he cried asthey descended. And heaven knows there are hills enoughbetween Rome and Florence by the way of Aquapendente! Thesetwo words greatly amused the men to whom they wereaddressed. On reaching La Storta, the point from whence Romeis first visible, the traveller evinced none of theenthusiastic curiosity which usually leads strangers tostand up and endeavor to catch sight of the dome of St.Peter's, which may be seen long before any other object isdistinguishable. No, he merely drew a pocketbook from hispocket, and took from it a paper folded in four, and afterhaving examined it in a manner almost reverential, he said-- "Good! I have it still!"

　　The carriage entered by the Porto del Popolo, turned to theleft, and stopped at the Hotel d'Espagne. Old Pastrini, ourformer acquaintance, received the traveller at the door, hatin hand. The traveller alighted, ordered a good dinner, andinquired the address of the house of Thomson & French, whichwas immediately given to him, as it was one of the mostcelebrated in Rome. It was situated in the Via dei Banchi,near St. Peter's. In Rome, as everywhere else, the arrivalof a post-chaise is an event. Ten young descendants ofMarius and the Gracchi, barefooted and out at elbows, withone hand resting on the hip and the other gracefully curvedabove the head, stared at the traveller, the post-chaise,and the horses; to these were added about fifty littlevagabonds from the Papal States, who earned a pittance bydiving into the Tiber at high water from the bridge of St.Angelo. Now, as these street Arabs of Rome, more fortunatethan those of Paris, understand every language, moreespecially the French, they heard the traveller order anapartment, a dinner, and finally inquire the way to thehouse of Thomson & French. The result was that when thenew-comer left the hotel with the cicerone, a man detachedhimself from the rest of the idlers, and without having beenseen by the traveller, and appearing to excite no attentionfrom the guide, followed the stranger with as much skill asa Parisian police agent would have used.

　　The Frenchman had been so impatient to reach the house ofThomson & French that he would not wait for the horses to beharnessed, but left word for the carriage to overtake him onthe road, or to wait for him at the bankers' door. Hereached it before the carriage arrived. The Frenchmanentered, leaving in the anteroom his guide, who immediatelyentered into conversation with two or three of theindustrious idlers who are always to be found in Rome at thedoors of banking-houses, churches, museums, or theatres.With the Frenchman, the man who had followed him enteredtoo; the Frenchman knocked at the inner door, and enteredthe first room; his shadow did the same.

　　"Messrs. Thomson & French?" inquired the stranger.

　　An attendant arose at a sign from a confidential clerk atthe first desk. "Whom shall I announce?" said the attendant.

　　"Baron Danglars."

　　"Follow me," said the man. A door opened, through which theattendant and the baron disappeared. The man who hadfollowed Danglars sat down on a bench. The clerk continuedto write for the next five minutes; the man preservedprofound silence, and remained perfectly motionless. Thenthe pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper; heraised his head, and appearing to be perfectly sure ofprivacy, -- "Ah, ha," he said, "here you are, Peppino!"

　　"Yes," was the laconic reply. "You have found out that thereis something worth having about this large gentleman?"

　　"There is no great merit due to me, for we were informed ofit."

　　"You know his business here, then."

　　"Pardieu, he has come to draw, but I don't know how much!"

　　"You will know presently, my friend."

　　"Very well, only do not give me false information as you didthe other day."

　　"What do you mean? -- of whom do you speak? Was it theEnglishman who carried off 3,000 crowns from here the otherday?"

　　"No; he really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them. I meanthe Russian prince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and weonly found 22,000."

　　"You must have searched badly."

　　"Luigi Vampa himself searched."

　　"Indeed? But you must let me make my observations, or theFrenchman will transact his business without my knowing thesum." Peppino nodded, and taking a rosary from his pocketbegan to mutter a few prayers while the clerk disappearedthrough the same door by which Danglars and the attendanthad gone out. At the expiration of ten minutes the clerkreturned with a beaming countenance. "Well?" asked Peppinoof his friend.

　　"Joy, joy -- the sum is large!"

　　"Five or six millions, is it not?"

　　"Yes, you know the amount."

　　"On the receipt of the Count of Monte Cristo?"

　　"Why, how came you to be so well acquainted with all this?"

　　"I told you we were informed beforehand."

　　"Then why do you apply to me?"

　　"That I may be sure I have the right man."

　　"Yes, it is indeed he. Five millions -- a pretty sum, eh,Peppino?"

　　"Hush -- here is our man!" The clerk seized his pen, andPeppino his beads; one was writing and the other prayingwhen the door opened. Danglars looked radiant with joy; thebanker accompanied him to the door. Peppino followedDanglars.

　　According to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting atthe door. The guide held the door open. Guides are usefulpeople, who will turn their hands to anything. Danglarsleaped into the carriage like a young man of twenty. Thecicerone reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of thecoachman. Peppino mounted the seat behind.

　　"Will your excellency visit St. Peter's?" asked thecicerone.

　　"I did not come to Rome to see," said Danglars aloud; thenhe added softly, with an avaricious smile, "I came totouch!" and he rapped his pocket-book, in which he had justplaced a letter.

　　"Then your excellency is going" --

　　"To the hotel."

　　"Casa Pastrini!" said the cicerone to the coachman, and thecarriage drove rapidly on. Ten minutes afterwards the baronentered his apartment, and Peppino stationed himself on thebench outside the door of the hotel, after having whisperedsomething in the ear of one of the descendants of Marius andthe Gracchi whom we noticed at the beginning of the chapter,who immediately ran down the road leading to the Capitol athis fullest speed. Danglars was tired and sleepy; hetherefore went to bed, placing his pocketbook under hispillow. Peppino had a little spare time, so he had a game ofmora with the facchini, lost three crowns, and then toconsole himself drank a bottle of Orvieto.

　　The next morning Danglars awoke late, though he went to bedso early; he had not slept well for five or six nights, evenif he had slept at all. He breakfasted heartily, and caringlittle, as he said, for the beauties of the Eternal City,ordered post-horses at noon. But Danglars had not reckonedupon the formalities of the police and the idleness of theposting-master. The horses only arrived at two o'clock, andthe cicerone did not bring the passport till three. Allthese preparations had collected a number of idlers roundthe door of Signor Pastrini's; the descendants of Marius andthe Gracchi were also not wanting. The baron walkedtriumphantly through the crowd, who for the sake of gainstyled him "your excellency." As Danglars had hithertocontented himself with being called a baron, he felt ratherflattered at the title of excellency, and distributed adozen silver coins among the beggars, who were ready, fortwelve more, to call him "your highness."

　　"Which road?" asked the postilion in Italian. "The Anconaroad," replied the baron. Signor Pastrini interpreted thequestion and answer, and the horses galloped off. Danglarsintended travelling to Venice, where he would receive onepart of his fortune, and then proceeding to Vienna, where hewould find the rest, he meant to take up his residence inthe latter town, which he had been told was a city ofpleasure.

　　He had scarcely advanced three leagues out of Rome whendaylight began to disappear. Danglars had not intendedstarting so late, or he would have remained; he put his headout and asked the postilion how long it would be before theyreached the next town. "Non capisco" (do not understand),was the reply. Danglars bent his head, which he meant toimply, "Very well." The carriage again moved on. "I willstop at the first posting-house," said Danglars to himself.

　　He still felt the same self-satisfaction which he hadexperienced the previous evening, and which had procured himso good a night's rest. He was luxuriously stretched in agood English calash, with double springs; he was drawn byfour good horses, at full gallop; he knew the relay to be ata distance of seven leagues. What subject of meditationcould present itself to the banker, so fortunately becomebankrupt?

　　Danglars thought for ten minutes about his wife in Paris;another ten minutes about his daughter travelling withMademoiselle d'Armilly; the same period was given to hiscreditors, and the manner in which he intended spendingtheir money; and then, having no subject left forcontemplation, he shut his eyes, and fell asleep. Now andthen a jolt more violent than the rest caused him to openhis eyes; then he felt that he was still being carried withgreat rapidity over the same country, thickly strewn withbroken aqueducts, which looked like granite giants petrifiedwhile running a race. But the night was cold, dull, andrainy, and it was much more pleasant for a traveller toremain in the warm carriage than to put his head out of thewindow to make inquiries of a postilion whose only answerwas "Non capisco."

　　Danglars therefore continued to sleep, saying to himselfthat he would be sure to awake at the posting-house. Thecarriage stopped. Danglars fancied that they had reached thelong-desired point; he opened his eyes and looked throughthe window, expecting to find himself in the midst of sometown, or at least village; but he saw nothing except whatseemed like a ruin, where three or four men went and camelike shadows. Danglars waited a moment, expecting thepostilion to come and demand payment with the termination ofhis stage. He intended taking advantage of the opportunityto make fresh inquiries of the new conductor; but the horseswere unharnessed, and others put in their places, withoutany one claiming money from the traveller. Danglars,astonished, opened the door; but a strong hand pushed himback, and the carriage rolled on. The baron was completelyroused. "Eh?" he said to the postilion, "eh, mio caro?"

　　This was another little piece of Italian the baron hadlearned from hearing his daughter sing Italian duets withCavalcanti. But mio caro did not reply. Danglars then openedthe window.

　　"Come, my friend," he said, thrusting his hand through theopening, "where are we going?"

　　"Dentro la testa!" answered a solemn and imperious voice,accompanied by a menacing gesture. Danglars thought dentrola testa meant, "Put in your head!" He was making rapidprogress in Italian. He obeyed, not without some uneasiness,which, momentarily increasing, caused his mind, instead ofbeing as unoccupied as it was when he began his journey, tofill with ideas which were very likely to keep a travellerawake, more especially one in such a situation as Danglars.His eyes acquired that quality which in the first moment ofstrong emotion enables them to see distinctly, and whichafterwards fails from being too much taxed. Before we arealarmed, we see correctly; when we are alarmed, we seedouble; and when we have been alarmed, we see nothing buttrouble. Danglars observed a man in a cloak galloping at theright hand of the carriage.

　　"Some gendarme!" he exclaimed. "Can I have been interceptedby French telegrams to the pontifical authorities?" Heresolved to end his anxiety. "Where are you taking me?" heasked. "Dentro la testa," replied the same voice, with thesame menacing accent.

　　Danglars turned to the left; another man on horseback wasgalloping on that side. "Decidedly," said Danglars, with theperspiration on his forehead, "I must be under arrest." Andhe threw himself back in the calash, not this time to sleep,but to think. Directly afterwards the moon rose. He then sawthe great aqueducts, those stone phantoms which he hadbefore remarked, only then they were on the right hand, nowthey were on the left. He understood that they had describeda circle, and were bringing him back to Rome. "Oh,unfortunate!" he cried, "they must have obtained my arrest."The carriage continued to roll on with frightful speed. Anhour of terror elapsed, for every spot they passed showedthat they were on the road back. At length he saw a darkmass, against which it seemed as if the carriage was aboutto dash; but the vehicle turned to one side, leaving thebarrier behind and Danglars saw that it was one of theramparts encircling Rome.

　　"Mon dieu!" cried Danglars, "we are not returning to Rome;then it is not justice which is pursuing me! Graciousheavens; another idea presents itself -- what if they shouldbe" --

　　His hair stood on end. He remembered those interestingstories, so little believed in Paris, respecting Romanbandits; he remembered the adventures that Albert de Morcerfhad related when it was intended that he should marryMademoiselle Eugenie. "They are robbers, perhaps," hemuttered. Just then the carriage rolled on something harderthan gravel road. Danglars hazarded a look on both sides ofthe road, and perceived monuments of a singular form, andhis mind now recalled all the details Morcerf had related,and comparing them with his own situation, he felt sure thathe must be on the Appian Way. On the left, in a sort ofvalley, he perceived a circular excavation. It wasCaracalla's circus. On a word from the man who rode at theside of the carriage, it stopped. At the same time the doorwas opened. "Scendi!" exclaimed a commanding voice. Danglarsinstantly descended; although he did not yet speak Italian,he understood it very well. More dead than alive, he lookedaround him. Four men surrounded him, besides the postilion.

　　"Di qua," said one of the men, descending a little pathleading out of the Appian Way. Danglars followed his guidewithout opposition, and had no occasion to turn around tosee whether the three others were following him. Still itappeared as though they were stationed at equal distancesfrom one another, like sentinels. After walking for aboutten minutes, during which Danglars did not exchange a singleword with his guide, he found himself between a hillock anda clump of high weeds; three men, standing silent, formed atriangle, of which he was the centre. He wished to speak,but his tongue refused to move. "Avanti!" said the samesharp and imperative voice.

　　This time Danglars had double reason to understand, for ifthe word and gesture had not explained the speaker'smeaning, it was clearly expressed by the man walking behindhim, who pushed him so rudely that he struck against theguide. This guide was our friend Peppino, who dashed intothe thicket of high weeds, through a path which none butlizards or polecats could have imagined to be an open road.Peppino stopped before a pit overhung by thick hedges; thepit, half open, afforded a passage to the young man, whodisappeared like the evil spirits in the fairy tales. Thevoice and gesture of the man who followed Danglars orderedhim to do the same. There was no longer any doubt, thebankrupt was in the hands of Roman banditti. Danglarsacquitted himself like a man placed between two dangerouspositions, and who is rendered brave by fear.Notwithstanding his large stomach, certainly not intended topenetrate the fissures of the Campagna, he slid down likePeppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet. As hetouched the ground, he opened his eyes. The path was wide,but dark. Peppino, who cared little for being recognized nowthat he was in his own territories, struck a light and lit atorch. Two other men descended after Danglars forming therearguard, and pushing Danglars whenever he happened tostop, they came by a gentle declivity to the intersection oftwo corridors. The walls were hollowed out in sepulchres,one above the other, and which seemed in contrast with thewhite stones to open their large dark eyes, like those whichwe see on the faces of the dead. A sentinel struck the ringsof his carbine against his left hand. "Who comes there?" hecried.

　　"A friend, a friend!" said Peppino; "but where is thecaptain?"

　　"There," said the sentinel, pointing over his shoulder to aspacious crypt, hollowed out of the rock, the lights fromwhich shone into the passage through the large archedopenings. "Fine spoil, captain, fine spoil!" said Peppino inItalian, and taking Danglars by the collar of his coat hedragged him to an opening resembling a door, through whichthey entered the apartment which the captain appeared tohave made his dwelling-place.

　　"Is this the man?" asked the captain, who was attentivelyreading Plutarch's "Life of Alexander."

　　"Himself, captain -- himself."

　　"Very well, show him to me." At this rather impertinentorder, Peppino raised his torch to the face of Danglars, whohastily withdrew that he might not have his eyelashes burnt.His agitated features presented the appearance of pale andhideous terror. "The man is tired," said the captain,"conduct him to his bed."

　　"Oh," murmured Danglars," that bed is probably one of thecoffins hollowed in the wall, and the sleep I shall enjoywill be death from one of the poniards I see glistening inthe darkness."

　　From their beds of dried leaves or wolf-skins at the back ofthe chamber now arose the companions of the man who had beenfound by Albert de Morcerf reading "Caesar's Commentaries,"and by Danglars studying the "Life of Alexander." The bankeruttered a groan and followed his guide; he neithersupplicated nor exclaimed. He no longer possessed strength,will, power, or feeling; he followed where they led him. Atlength he found himself at the foot of a staircase, and hemechanically lifted his foot five or six times. Then a lowdoor was opened before him, and bending his head to avoidstriking his forehead he entered a small room cut out of therock. The cell was clean, though empty, and dry, thoughsituated at an immeasurable distance under the earth. A bedof dried grass covered with goat-skins was placed in onecorner. Danglars brightened up on beholding it, fancyingthat it gave some promise of safety. "Oh, God be praised,"he said; "it is a real bed!"

　　"Ecco!" said the guide, and pushing Danglars into the cell,he closed the door upon him. A bolt grated and Danglars wasa prisoner. If there had been no bolt, it would have beenimpossible for him to pass through the midst of the garrisonwho held the catacombs of St. Sebastian, encamped round amaster whom our readers must have recognized as the famousLuigi Vampa. Danglars, too, had recognized the bandit, whoseexistence he would not believe when Albert de Morcerfmentioned him in Paris; and not only did he recognize him,but the cell in which Albert had been confined, and whichwas probably kept for the accommodation of strangers. Theserecollections were dwelt upon with some pleasure byDanglars, and restored him to some degree of tranquillity.Since the bandits had not despatched him at once, he feltthat they would not kill him at all. They had arrested himfor the purpose of robbery, and as he had only a few louisabout him, he doubted not he would be ransomed. Heremembered that Morcerf had been taxed at 4,000 crowns, andas he considered himself of much greater importance thanMorcerf he fixed his own price at 8,000 crowns. Eightthousand crowns amounted to 48,000 livres; he would thenhave about 5,050,000 francs left. With this sum he couldmanage to keep out of difficulties. Therefore, tolerablysecure in being able to extricate himself from his position,provided he were not rated at the unreasonable sum of5,050,000 francs, he stretched himself on his bed, and afterturning over two or three times, fell asleep with thetranquillity of the hero whose life Luigi Vampa wasstudying.

　　Chapter 115Luigi Vampa's Bill of Fare.

　　We awake from every sleep except the one dreaded byDanglars. He awoke. To a Parisian accustomed to silkencurtains, walls hung with velvet drapery, and the softperfume of burning wood, the white smoke of which diffusesitself in graceful curves around the room, the appearance ofthe whitewashed cell which greeted his eyes on awakeningseemed like the continuation of some disagreeable dream. Butin such a situation a single moment suffices to change thestrongest doubt into certainty. "Yes, yes," he murmured, "Iam in the hands of the brigands of whom Albert de Morcerfspoke." His first idea was to breathe, that he might knowwhether he was wounded. He borrowed this from "Don Quixote,"the only book he had ever read, but which he still slightlyremembered.

　　"No," he cried, "they have not wounded, but perhaps theyhave robbed me!" and he thrust his hands into his pockets.They were untouched; the hundred louis he had reserved forhis journey from Rome to Venice were in his trousers pocket,and in that of his great-coat he found the little note-casecontaining his letter of credit for 5,050,000 francs."Singular bandits!" he exclaimed; "they have left me mypurse and pocket-book. As I was saying last night, theyintend me to be ransomed. Hallo, here is my watch! Let mesee what time it is." Danglars' watch, one of Breguet'srepeaters, which he had carefully wound up on the previousnight, struck half past five. Without this, Danglars wouldhave been quite ignorant of the time, for daylight did notreach his cell. Should he demand an explanation from thebandits, or should he wait patiently for them to propose it?The last alternative seemed the most prudent, so he waiteduntil twelve o'clock. During all this time a sentinel, whohad been relieved at eight o'clock, had been watching hisdoor. Danglars suddenly felt a strong inclination to see theperson who kept watch over him. He had noticed that a fewrays, not of daylight, but from a lamp, penetrated throughthe ill-joined planks of the door; he approached just as thebrigand was refreshing himself with a mouthful of brandy,which, owing to the leathern bottle containing it, sentforth an odor which was extremely unpleasant to Danglars."Faugh!" he exclaimed, retreating to the farther corner ofhis cell.

　　At twelve this man was replaced by another functionary, andDanglars, wishing to catch sight of his new guardian,approached the door again. He was an athletic, giganticbandit, with large eyes, thick lips, and a flat nose; hisred hair fell in dishevelled masses like snakes around hisshoulders. "Ah, ha," cried Danglars, "this fellow is morelike an ogre than anything else; however, I am rather tooold and tough to be very good eating!" We see that Danglarswas collected enough to jest; at the same time, as though todisprove the ogreish propensities, the man took some blackbread, cheese, and onions from his wallet, which he begandevouring voraciously. "May I be hanged," said Danglars,glancing at the bandit's dinner through the crevices of thedoor, -- "may I be hanged if I can understand how people caneat such filth!" and he withdrew to seat himself upon hisgoat-skin, which reminded him of the smell of the brandy.

　　But the mysteries of nature are incomprehensible, and thereare certain invitations contained in even the coarsest foodwhich appeal very irresistibly to a fasting stomach.Danglars felt his own not to be very well supplied justthen, and gradually the man appeared less ugly, the breadless black, and the cheese more fresh, while those dreadfulvulgar onions recalled to his mind certain sauces andside-dishes, which his cook prepared in a very superiormanner whenever he said, "Monsieur Deniseau, let me have anice little fricassee to-day." He got up and knocked on thedoor; the bandit raised his head. Danglars knew that he washeard, so he redoubled his blows. "Che cosa?" asked thebandit. "Come, come," said Danglars, tapping his fingersagainst the door, "I think it is quite time to think ofgiving me something to eat!" But whether he did notunderstand him, or whether he had received no ordersrespecting the nourishment of Danglars, the giant, withoutanswering, went on with his dinner. Danglars' feelings werehurt, and not wishing to put himself under obligations tothe brute, the banker threw himself down again on hisgoat-skin and did not breathe another word.

　　Four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by anotherbandit. Danglars, who really began to experience sundrygnawings at the stomach, arose softly, again applied his eyeto the crack of the door, and recognized the intelligentcountenance of his guide. It was, indeed, Peppino who waspreparing to mount guard as comfortably as possible byseating himself opposite to the door, and placing betweenhis legs an earthen pan, containing chick-pease stewed withbacon. Near the pan he also placed a pretty little basket ofVilletri grapes and a flask of Orvieto. Peppino wasdecidedly an epicure. Danglars watched these preparationsand his mouth watered. "Come," he said to himself, "let metry if he will be more tractable than the other;" and hetapped gently at the door. "On y va," (coming) exclaimedPeppino, who from frequenting the house of Signor Pastriniunderstood French perfectly in all its idioms.

　　Danglars immediately recognized him as the man who hadcalled out in such a furious manner, "Put in your head!" Butthis was not the time for recrimination, so he assumed hismost agreeable manner and said with a gracious smile, --"Excuse me, sir, but are they not going to give me anydinner?"

　　"Does your excellency happen to be hungry?"

　　"Happen to be hungry, -- that's pretty good, when I haven'teaten for twenty-four hours!" muttered Danglars. Then headded aloud, "Yes, sir, I am hungry -- very hungry."

　　"What would your excellency like?" and Peppino placed hispan on the ground, so that the steam rose directly under thenostrils of Danglars. "Give your orders."

　　"Have you kitchens here?"

　　"Kitchens? -- of course -- complete ones."

　　"And cooks?"

　　"Excellent!"

　　"Well, a fowl, fish, game, -- it signifies little, so that Ieat."

　　"As your excellency pleases. You mentioned a fowl, I think?"

　　"Yes, a fowl." Peppino, turning around, shouted, "A fowl forhis excellency!" His voice yet echoed in the archway when ahandsome, graceful, and half-naked young man appeared,bearing a fowl in a silver dish on his head, without theassistance of his hands. "I could almost believe myself atthe Cafe de Paris," murmured Danglars.

　　"Here, your excellency," said Peppino, taking the fowl fromthe young bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table,which with the stool and the goat-skin bed formed the entirefurniture of the cell. Danglars asked for a knife and fork."Here, excellency," said Peppino, offering him a littleblunt knife and a boxwood fork. Danglars took the knife inone hand and the fork in the other, and was about to cut upthe fowl. "Pardon me, excellency," said Peppino, placing hishand on the banker's shoulder; "people pay here before theyeat. They might not be satisfied, and" --

　　"Ah, ha," thought Danglars, "this is not so much like Paris,except that I shall probably be skinned! Never mind, I'llfix that all right. I have always heard how cheap poultry isin Italy; I should think a fowl is worth about twelve sousat Rome. -- There," he said, throwing a louis down. Peppinopicked up the louis, and Danglars again prepared to carvethe fowl. "Stay a moment, your excellency," said Peppino,rising; "you still owe me something."

　　"I said they would skin me," thought Danglars; but resolvingto resist the extortion, he said, "Come, how much do I oweyou for this fowl?"

　　"Your excellency has given me a louis on account."

　　"A louis on account for a fowl?"

　　"Certainly; and your excellency now owes me 4,999 louis."Danglars opened his enormous eyes on hearing this giganticjoke. "Come, come, this is very droll -- very amusing -- Iallow; but, as I am very hungry, pray allow me to eat. Stay,here is another louis for you."

　　"Then that will make only 4,998 louis more," said Peppinowith the same indifference. "I shall get them all in time."

　　"Oh, as for that," said Danglars, angry at this prolongationof the jest, -- "as for that you won't get them at all. Goto the devil! You do not know with whom you have to deal!"Peppino made a sign, and the youth hastily removed the fowl.Danglars threw himself upon his goat-skin, and Peppino,reclosing the door, again began eating his pease and bacon.Though Danglars could not see Peppino, the noise of histeeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation. He wascertainly eating, and noisily too, like an ill-bred man."Brute!" said Danglars. Peppino pretended not to hear him,and without even turning his head continued to eat slowly.Danglars' stomach felt so empty, that it seemed as if itwould be impossible ever to fill it again; still he hadpatience for another half-hour, which appeared to him like acentury. He again arose and went to the door. "Come, sir, donot keep me starving here any longer, but tell me what theywant."

　　"Nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what youwant. Give your orders, and we will execute them."

　　"Then open the door directly." Peppino obeyed. "Now lookhere, I want something to eat! To eat -- do you hear?"

　　"Are you hungry?"

　　"Come, you understand me."

　　"What would your excellency like to eat?"

　　"A piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all pricein this accursed place."

　　"Bread? Very well. Hallo, there, some bread!" he called. Theyouth brought a small loaf. "How much?" asked Danglars.

　　"Four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis," saidPeppino; "You have paid two louis in advance."

　　"What? One hundred thousand francs for a loaf?"

　　"One hundred thousand francs," repeated Peppino.

　　"But you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!"

　　"We have a fixed price for all our provisions. It signifiesnothing whether you eat much or little -- whether you haveten dishes or one -- it is always the same price."

　　"What, still keeping up this silly jest? My dear fellow, itis perfectly ridiculous -- stupid! You had better tell me atonce that you intend starving me to death."

　　"Oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commitsuicide. Pay and eat."

　　"And what am I to pay with, brute?" said Danglars, enraged."Do you suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?"

　　"Your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; thatwill be fifty fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half afowl for the 50,000."

　　Danglars shuddered. The bandage fell from his eyes, and heunderstood the joke, which he did not think quite so stupidas he had done just before. "Come," he said, "if I pay youthe 100,000 francs, will you be satisfied, and allow me toeat at my ease?"

　　"Certainly," said Peppino.

　　"But how can I pay them?"

　　"Oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with Messrs.Thomson & French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft for4,998 louis on these gentlemen, and our banker shall takeit." Danglars thought it as well to comply with a goodgrace, so he took the pen, ink, and paper Peppino offeredhim, wrote the draft, and signed it. "Here," he said, "hereis a draft at sight."

　　"And here is your fowl." Danglars sighed while he carved thefowl; it appeared very thin for the price it had cost. Asfor Peppino, he examined the paper attentively, put it intohis pocket, and continued eating his pease.

　　Chapter 116The Pardon.

　　The next day Danglars was again hungry; certainly the air ofthat dungeon was very provocative of appetite. The prisonerexpected that he would be at no expense that day, for likean economical man he had concealed half of his fowl and apiece of the bread in the corner of his cell. But he had nosooner eaten than he felt thirsty; he had forgotten that. Hestruggled against his thirst till his tongue clave to theroof of his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he calledout. The sentinel opened the door; it was a new face. Hethought it would be better to transact business with his oldacquaintance, so he sent for Peppino. "Here I am, yourexcellency," said Peppino, with an eagerness which Danglarsthought favorable to him. "What do you want?"

　　"Something to drink."

　　"Your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price nearRome."

　　"Then give me water," cried Danglars, endeavoring to parrythe blow.

　　"Oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency,-- there has been such a drought."

　　"Come," thought Danglars, "it is the same old story." Andwhile he smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as ajoke, he felt his temples get moist with perspiration.

　　"Come, my friend," said Danglars, seeing that he made noimpression on Peppino, "you will not refuse me a glass ofwine?"

　　"I have already told you that we do not sell at retail."

　　"Well, then, let me have a bottle of the least expensive."

　　"They are all the same price."

　　"And what is that?"

　　"Twenty-five thousand francs a bottle."

　　"Tell me," cried Danglars, in a tone whose bitternessHarpagon* alone has been capable of revealing -- "tell thethat you wish to despoil me of all; it will be sooner overthan devouring me piecemeal."

　　* The miser in Moliere's comedy of "L'Avare." -- Ed.

　　"It is possible such may be the master's intention."

　　"The master? -- who is he?"

　　"The person to whom you were conducted yesterday."

　　"Where is he?"

　　"Here."

　　"Let me see him."

　　"Certainly." And the next moment Luigi Vampa appeared beforeDanglars.

　　"You sent for me?" he said to the prisoner.

　　"Are you, sir, the chief of the people who brought me here?"

　　"Yes, your excellency. What then?"

　　"How much do you require for my ransom?"

　　"Merely the 5,000,000 you have about you." Danglars felt adreadful spasm dart through his heart. "But this is all Ihave left in the world," he said, "out of an immensefortune. If you deprive me of that, take away my life also."

　　"We are forbidden to shed your blood."

　　"And by whom are you forbidden?"

　　"By him we obey."

　　"You do, then, obey some one?"

　　"Yes, a chief."

　　"I thought you said you were the chief?"

　　"So I am of these men; but there is another over me."

　　"And did your superior order you to treat me in this way?"

　　"Yes."

　　"But my purse will be exhausted."

　　"Probably."

　　"Come," said Danglars, "will you take a million?"

　　"No."

　　"Two millions? -- three? -- four? Come, four? I will givethem to you on condition that you let me go."

　　"Why do you offer me 4,000,000 for what is worth 5,000,000?This is a kind of usury, banker, that I do not understand."

　　"Take all, then -- take all, I tell you, and kill me!"

　　"Come, come, calm yourself. You will excite your blood, andthat would produce an appetite it would require a million aday to satisfy. Be more economical."

　　"But when I have no more money left to pay you?" asked theinfuriated Danglars.

　　"Then you must suffer hunger."

　　"Suffer hunger?" said Danglars, becoming pale.

　　"Most likely," replied Vampa coolly.

　　"But you say you do not wish to kill me?"

　　"No."

　　"And yet you will let me perish with hunger?"

　　"Ah, that is a different thing."

　　"Well, then, wretches," cried Danglars, "I will defy yourinfamous calculations -- I would rather die at once! You maytorture, torment, kill me, but you shall not have mysignature again!"

　　"As your excellency pleases," said Vampa, as he left thecell. Danglars, raving, threw himself on the goat-skin. Whocould these men be? Who was the invisible chief? What couldbe his intentions towards him? And why, when every one elsewas allowed to be ransomed, might he not also be? Oh, yes;certainly a speedy, violent death would be a fine means ofdeceiving these remorseless enemies, who appeared to pursuehim with such incomprehensible vengeance. But to die? Forthe first time in his life, Danglars contemplated death witha mixture of dread and desire; the time had come when theimplacable spectre, which exists in the mind of every humancreature, arrested his attention and called out with everypulsation of his heart, "Thou shalt die!"

　　Danglars resembled a timid animal excited in the chase;first it flies, then despairs, and at last, by the veryforce of desperation, sometimes succeeds in eluding itspursuers. Danglars meditated an escape; but the walls weresolid rock, a man was sitting reading at the only outlet tothe cell, and behind that man shapes armed with gunscontinually passed. His resolution not to sign lasted twodays, after which he offered a million for some food. Theysent him a magnificent supper, and took his million.

　　From this time the prisoner resolved to suffer no longer,but to have everything he wanted. At the end of twelve days,after having made a splendid dinner, he reckoned hisaccounts, and found that he had only 50,000 francs left.Then a strange reaction took place; he who had justabandoned 5,000,000 endeavored to save the 50,000 francs hehad left, and sooner than give them up he resolved to enteragain upon a life of privation -- he was deluded by thehopefulness that is a premonition of madness. He who for solong a time had forgotten God, began to think that miracleswere possible -- that the accursed cavern might bediscovered by the officers of the Papal States, who wouldrelease him; that then he would have 50,000 remaining, whichwould be sufficient to save him from starvation; and finallyhe prayed that this sum might be preserved to him, and as heprayed he wept. Three days passed thus, during which hisprayers were frequent, if not heartfelt. Sometimes he wasdelirious, and fancied he saw an old man stretched on apallet; he, also, was dying of hunger.

　　On the fourth, he was no longer a man, but a living corpse.He had picked up every crumb that had been left from hisformer meals, and was beginning to eat the matting whichcovered the floor of his cell. Then he entreated Peppino, ashe would a guardian angel, to give him food; he offered him1,000 francs for a mouthful of bread. But Peppino did notanswer. On the fifth day he dragged himself to the door ofthe cell.

　　"Are you not a Christian?" he said, falling on his knees."Do you wish to assassinate a man who, in the eyes ofheaven, is a brother? Oh, my former friends, my formerfriends!" he murmured, and fell with his face to the ground.Then rising in despair, he exclaimed, "The chief, thechief!"

　　"Here I am," said Vampa, instantly appearing; "what do youwant?"

　　"Take my last gold," muttered Danglars, holding out hispocket-book, "and let me live here; I ask no more forliberty -- I only ask to live!"

　　"Then you suffer a great deal?"

　　"Oh, yes, yes, cruelly!"

　　"Still, there have been men who suffered more than you."

　　"I do not think so."

　　"Yes; those who have died of hunger."

　　Danglars thought of the old man whom, in his hours ofdelirium, he had seen groaning on his bed. He struck hisforehead on the ground and groaned. "Yes," he said, "therehave been some who have suffered more than I have, but thenthey must have been martyrs at least."

　　"Do you repent?" asked a deep, solemn voice, which causedDanglars' hair to stand on end. His feeble eyes endeavoredto distinguish objects, and behind the bandit he saw a manenveloped in a cloak, half lost in the shadow of a stonecolumn.

　　"Of what must I repent?" stammered Danglars.

　　"Of the evil you have done," said the voice.

　　"Oh, yes; oh, yes, I do indeed repent." And he struck hisbreast with his emaciated fist.

　　"Then I forgive you," said the man, dropping his cloak, andadvancing to the light.

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo!" said Danglars, more pale fromterror than he had been just before from hunger and misery.

　　"You are mistaken -- I am not the Count of Monte Cristo."

　　"Then who are you?"

　　"I am he whom you sold and dishonored -- I am he whosebetrothed you prostituted -- I am he upon whom you trampledthat you might raise yourself to fortune -- I am he whosefather you condemned to die of hunger -- I am he whom youalso condemned to starvation, and who yet forgives you,because he hopes to be forgiven -- I am Edmond Dantes!"Danglars uttered a cry, and fell prostrate. "Rise," said thecount, "your life is safe; the same good fortune has nothappened to your accomplices -- one is mad, the other dead.Keep the 50,000 francs you have left -- I give them to you.The 5,000,000 you stole from the hospitals has been restoredto them by an unknown hand. And now eat and drink; I willentertain you to-night. Vampa, when this man is satisfied,let him be free." Danglars remained prostrate while thecount withdrew; when he raised his head he saw disappearingdown the passage nothing but a shadow, before which thebandits bowed. According to the count's directions, Danglarswas waited on by Vampa, who brought him the best wine andfruits of Italy; then, having conducted him to the road, andpointed to the post-chaise, left him leaning against a tree.He remained there all night, not knowing where he was. Whendaylight dawned he saw that he was near a stream; he wasthirsty, and dragged himself towards it. As he stooped downto drink, he saw that his hair had become entirely white.

　　Chapter 117The Fifth of October.

　　It was about six o'clock in the evening; an opal-coloredlight, through which an autumnal sun shed its golden rays,descended on the blue ocean. The heat of the day hadgradually decreased, and a light breeze arose, seeming likethe respiration of nature on awakening from the burningsiesta of the south. A delicious zephyr played along thecoasts of the Mediterranean, and wafted from shore to shorethe sweet perfume of plants, mingled with the fresh smell ofthe sea.

　　A light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was glidingamidst the first dews of night over the immense lake,extending from Gibraltar to the Dardanelles, and from Tunisto Venice. The vessel resembled a swan with its wings openedtowards the wind, gliding on the water. It advanced swiftlyand gracefully, leaving behind it a glittering stretch offoam. By degrees the sun disappeared behind the westernhorizon; but as though to prove the truth of the fancifulideas in heathen mythology, its indiscreet rays reappearedon the summit of every wave, as if the god of fire had justsunk upon the bosom of Amphitrite, who in vain endeavored tohide her lover beneath her azure mantle. The yacht movedrapidly on, though there did not appear to be sufficientwind to ruffle the curls on the head of a young girl.Standing on the prow was a tall man, of a dark complexion,who saw with dilating eyes that they were approaching a darkmass of land in the shape of a cone, which rose from themidst of the waves like the hat of a Catalan. "Is that MonteCristo?" asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht wasfor the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.

　　"Yes, your excellency," said the captain, "we have reachedit."

　　"We have reached it!" repeated the traveller in an accent ofindescribable sadness. Then he added, in a low tone, "Yes;that is the haven." And then he again plunged into a trainof thought, the character of which was better revealed by asad smile, than it would have been by tears. A few minutesafterwards a flash of light, which was extinguishedinstantly, was seen on the land, and the sound of firearmsreached the yacht.

　　"Your excellency," said the captain, "that was the landsignal, will you answer yourself?"

　　"What signal?" The captain pointed towards the island, upthe side of which ascended a volume of smoke, increasing asit rose. "Ah, yes," he said, as if awaking from a dream."Give it to me."

　　The captain gave him a loaded carbine; the traveller slowlyraised it, and fired in the air. Ten minutes afterwards, thesails were furled, and they cast anchor about a hundredfathoms from the little harbor. The gig was already lowered,and in it were four oarsmen and a coxswain. The travellerdescended, and instead of sitting down at the stern of theboat, which had been decorated with a blue carpet for hisaccommodation, stood up with his arms crossed. The rowerswaited, their oars half lifted out of the water, like birdsdrying their wings.

　　"Give way," said the traveller. The eight oars fell into thesea simultaneously without splashing a drop of water, andthe boat, yielding to the impulsion, glided forward. In aninstant they found themselves in a little harbor, formed ina natural creek; the boat grounded on the fine sand.

　　"Will your excellency be so good as to mount the shouldersof two of our men, they will carry you ashore?" The youngman answered this invitation with a gesture of indifference,and stepped out of the boat; the sea immediately rose to hiswaist. "Ah, your excellency," murmured the pilot, "youshould not have done so; our master will scold us for it."The young man continued to advance, following the sailors,who chose a firm footing. Thirty strides brought them to dryland; the young man stamped on the ground to shake off thewet, and looked around for some one to show him his road,for it was quite dark. Just as he turned, a hand rested onhis shoulder, and a voice which made him shudder exclaimed,-- "Good-evening, Maximilian; you are punctual, thank you!"

　　"Ah, is it you, count?" said the young man, in an almostjoyful accent, pressing Monte Cristo's hand with both hisown.

　　"Yes; you see I am as exact as you are. But you aredripping, my dear fellow; you must change your clothes, asCalypso said to Telemachus. Come, I have a habitationprepared for you in which you will soon forget fatigue andcold." Monte Cristo perceived that the young man had turnedaround; indeed, Morrel saw with surprise that the men whohad brought him had left without being paid, or uttering aword. Already the sound of their oars might be heard as theyreturned to the yacht.

　　"Oh, yes," said the count, "you are looking for thesailors."

　　"Yes, I paid them nothing, and yet they are gone."

　　"Never mind that, Maximilian," said Monte Cristo, smiling."I have made an agreement with the navy, that the access tomy island shall be free of all charge. I have made abargain." Morrel looked at the count with surprise. "Count,"he said, "you are not the same here as in Paris."

　　"How so?"

　　"Here you laugh." The count's brow became clouded. "You areright to recall me to myself, Maximilian," he said; "I wasdelighted to see you again, and forgot for the moment thatall happiness is fleeting."

　　"Oh, no, no, count," cried Maximilian, seizing the count'shands, "pray laugh; be happy, and prove to me, by yourindifference, that life is endurable to sufferers. Oh, howcharitable, kind, and good you are; you affect this gayetyto inspire me with courage."

　　"You are wrong, Morrel; I was really happy."

　　"Then you forget me, so much the better."

　　"How so?"

　　"Yes; for as the gladiator said to the emperor, when heentered the arena, `He who is about to die salutes you.'"

　　"Then you are not consoled?" asked the count, surprised.

　　"Oh," exclaimed Morrel, with a glance full of bitterreproach, "do you think it possible that I could be?"

　　"Listen," said the count. "Do you understand the meaning ofmy words? You cannot take me for a commonplace man, a mererattle, emitting a vague and senseless noise. When I ask youif you are consoled, I speak to you as a man for whom thehuman heart has no secrets. Well, Morrel, let us bothexamine the depths of your heart. Do you still feel the samefeverish impatience of grief which made you start like awounded lion? Have you still that devouring thirst which canonly be appeased in the grave? Are you still actuated by theregret which drags the living to the pursuit of death; orare you only suffering from the prostration of fatigue andthe weariness of hope deferred? Has the loss of memoryrendered it impossible for you to weep? Oh, my dear friend,if this be the case, -- if you can no longer weep, if yourfrozen heart be dead, if you put all your trust in God,then, Maximilian, you are consoled -- do not complain."

　　"Count," said Morrel, in a firm and at the same time softvoice, "listen to me, as to a man whose thoughts are raisedto heaven, though he remains on earth; I come to die in thearms of a friend. Certainly, there are people whom I love. Ilove my sister Julie, -- I love her husband Emmanuel; but Irequire a strong mind to smile on my last moments. My sisterwould be bathed in tears and fainting; I could not bear tosee her suffer. Emmanuel would tear the weapon from my hand,and alarm the house with his cries. You, count, who are morethan mortal, will, I am sure, lead me to death by a pleasantpath, will you not?"

　　"My friend," said the count, "I have still one doubt, -- areyou weak enough to pride yourself upon your sufferings?"

　　"No, indeed, -- I am calm," said Morrel, giving his hand tothe count; "my pulse does not beat slower or faster thanusual. No, I feel that I have reached the goal, and I willgo no farther. You told me to wait and hope; do you knowwhat you did, unfortunate adviser? I waited a month, orrather I suffered for a month! I did hope (man is a poorwretched creature), I did hope. What I cannot tell, --something wonderful, an absurdity, a miracle, -- of whatnature he alone can tell who has mingled with our reasonthat folly we call hope. Yes, I did wait -- yes, I did hope,count, and during this quarter of an hour we have beentalking together, you have unconsciously wounded, torturedmy heart, for every word you have uttered proved that therewas no hope for me. Oh, count, I shall sleep calmly,deliciously in the arms of death." Morrel uttered thesewords with an energy which made the count shudder. "Myfriend," continued Morrel, "you named the fifth of Octoberas the end of the period of waiting, -- to-day is the fifthof October," he took out his watch, "it is now nine o'clock,-- I have yet three hours to live."

　　"Be it so," said the count, "come." Morrel mechanicallyfollowed the count, and they had entered the grotto beforehe perceived it. He felt a carpet under his feet, a dooropened, perfumes surrounded him, and a brilliant lightdazzled his eyes. Morrel hesitated to advance; he dreadedthe enervating effect of all that he saw. Monte Cristo drewhim in gently. "Why should we not spend the last three hoursremaining to us of life, like those ancient Romans, who whencondemned by Nero, their emperor and heir, sat down at atable covered with flowers, and gently glided into death,amid the perfume of heliotropes and roses?" Morrel smiled."As you please," he said; "death is always death, -- that isforgetfulness, repose, exclusion from life, and thereforefrom grief." He sat down, and Monte Cristo placed himselfopposite to him. They were in the marvellous dining-roombefore described, where the statues had baskets on theirheads always filled with fruits and flowers. Morrel hadlooked carelessly around, and had probably noticed nothing.

　　"Let us talk like men," he said, looking at the count.

　　"Go on!"

　　"Count," said Morrel, "you are the epitome of all humanknowledge, and you seem like a being descended from a wiserand more advanced world than ours."

　　"There is something true in what you say," said the count,with that smile which made him so handsome; "I havedescended from a planet called grief."

　　"I believe all you tell me without questioning its meaning;for instance, you told me to live, and I did live; you toldme to hope, and I almost did so. I am almost inclined to askyou, as though you had experienced death, `is it painful todie?'"

　　Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribabletenderness. "Yes," he said, "yes, doubtless it is painful,if you violently break the outer covering which obstinatelybegs for life. If you plunge a dagger into your flesh, ifyou insinuate a bullet into your brain, which the leastshock disorders, -- then certainly, you will suffer pain,and you will repent quitting a life for a repose you havebought at so dear a price."

　　"Yes; I know that there is a secret of luxury and pain indeath, as well as in life; the only thing is to understandit."

　　"You have spoken truly, Maximilian; according to the care webestow upon it, death is either a friend who rocks us gentlyas a nurse, or an enemy who violently drags the soul fromthe body. Some day, when the world is much older, and whenmankind will be masters of all the destructive powers innature, to serve for the general good of humanity; whenmankind, as you were just saying, have discovered thesecrets of death, then that death will become as sweet andvoluptuous as a slumber in the arms of your beloved."

　　"And if you wished to die, you would choose this death,count?"

　　"Yes."

　　Morrel extended his hand. "Now I understand," he said, "whyyou had me brought here to this desolate spot, in the midstof the ocean, to this subterranean palace; it was becauseyou loved me, was it not, count? It was because you loved mewell enough to give me one of those sweet means of death ofwhich we were speaking; a death without agony, a death whichallows me to fade away while pronouncing Valentine's nameand pressing your hand."

　　"Yes, you have guessed rightly, Morrel," said the count,"that is what I intended."

　　"Thanks; the idea that tomorrow I shall no longer suffer, issweet to my heart."

　　"Do you then regret nothing?"

　　"No," replied Morrel.

　　"Not even me?" asked the count with deep emotion. Morrel'sclear eye was for the moment clouded, then it shone withunusual lustre, and a large tear rolled down his cheek.

　　"What," said the count, "do you still regret anything in theworld, and yet die?"

　　"Oh, I entreat you," exclaimed Morrel in a low voice, "donot speak another word, count; do not prolong mypunishment." The count fancied that he was yielding, andthis belief revived the horrible doubt that had overwhelmedhim at the Chateau d'If. "I am endeavoring," he thought, "tomake this man happy; I look upon this restitution as aweight thrown into the scale to balance the evil I havewrought. Now, supposing I am deceived, supposing this manhas not been unhappy enough to merit happiness. Alas, whatwould become of me who can only atone for evil by doinggood?" Then he said aloud: "Listen, Morrel, I see your griefis great, but still you do not like to risk your soul."Morrel smiled sadly. "Count," he said, "I swear to you mysoul is no longer my own."

　　"Maximilian, you know I have no relation in the world. Ihave accustomed myself to regard you as my son: well, then,to save my son, I will sacrifice my life, nay, even myfortune."

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"I mean, that you wish to quit life because you do notunderstand all the enjoyments which are the fruits of alarge fortune. Morrel, I possess nearly a hundred millionsand I give them to you; with such a fortune you can attainevery wish. Are you ambitions? Every career is open to you.Overturn the world, change its character, yield to madideas, be even criminal -- but live."

　　"Count, I have your word," said Morrel coldly; then takingout his watch, he added, "It is half-past eleven."

　　"Morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very eyes?"

　　"Then let me go," said Maximilian, "or I shall think you didnot love me for my own sake, but for yours; "and he arose.

　　"It is well," said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightenedat these words; "you wish -- you are inflexible. Yes, as yousaid, you are indeed wretched and a miracle alone can cureyou. Sit down, Morrel, and wait."

　　Morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking a closet witha key suspended from his gold chain, took from it a littlesilver casket, beautifully carved and chased, the corners ofwhich represented four bending figures, similar to theCaryatides, the forms of women, symbols of the angelsaspiring to heaven. He placed the casket on the table; thenopening it took out a little golden box, the top of whichflew open when touched by a secret spring. This boxcontained an unctuous substance partly solid, of which itwas impossible to discover the color, owing to thereflection of the polished gold, sapphires, rubies,emeralds, which ornamented the box. It was a mixed mass ofblue, red, and gold. The count took out a small quantity ofthis with a gilt spoon, and offered it to Morrel, fixing along steadfast glance upon him. It was then observable thatthe substance was greenish.

　　"This is what you asked for," he said, "and what I promisedto give you."

　　"I thank you from the depths of my heart," said the youngman, taking the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo. Thecount took another spoon, and again dipped it into thegolden box. "What are you going to do, my friend?" askedMorrel, arresting his hand.

　　"Well, the fact is, Morrel, I was thinking that I too amweary of life, and since an opportunity presents itself" --

　　"Stay!" said the young man. "You who love, and are beloved;you, who have faith and hope, -- oh, do not follow myexample. In your case it would be a crime. Adieu, my nobleand generous friend, adieu; I will go and tell Valentinewhat you have done for me." And slowly, though without anyhesitation, only waiting to press the count's handfervently, he swallowed the mysterious substance offered byMonte Cristo. Then they were both silent. Ali, mute andattentive, brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared. Bydegrees, the light of the lamps gradually faded in the handsof the marble statues which held them, and the perfumesappeared less powerful to Morrel. Seated opposite to him,Monte Cristo watched him in the shadow, and Morrel sawnothing but the bright eyes of the count. An overpoweringsadness took possession of the young man, his hands relaxedtheir hold, the objects in the room gradually lost theirform and color, and his disturbed vision seemed to perceivedoors and curtains open in the walls.

　　"Friend," he cried, "I feel that I am dying; thanks!" Hemade a last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerlessbeside him. Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristosmiled, not with the strange and fearful expression whichhad sometimes revealed to him the secrets of his heart, butwith the benevolent kindness of a father for a child. At thesame time the count appeared to increase in stature, hisform, nearly double its usual height, stood out in reliefagainst the red tapestry, his black hair was thrown back,and he stood in the attitude of an avenging angel. Morrel,overpowered, turned around in the arm-chair; a delicioustorpor permeated every vein. A change of ideas presentedthemselves to his brain, like a new design on thekaleidoscope. Enervated, prostrate, and breathless, hebecame unconscious of outward objects; he seemed to beentering that vague delirium preceding death. He wished onceagain to press the count's hand, but his own was immovable.He wished to articulate a last farewell, but his tongue laymotionless and heavy in his throat, like a stone at themouth of a sepulchre. Involuntarily his languid eyes closed,and still through his eyelashes a well-known form seemed tomove amid the obscurity with which he thought himselfenveloped.

　　The count had just opened a door. Immediately a brilliantlight from the next room, or rather from the palaceadjoining, shone upon the room in which he was gentlygliding into his last sleep. Then he saw a woman ofmarvellous beauty appear on the threshold of the doorseparating the two rooms. Pale, and sweetly smiling, shelooked like an angel of mercy conjuring the angel ofvengeance. "Is it heaven that opens before me?" thought thedying man; "that angel resembles the one I have lost." MonteCristo pointed out Morrel to the young woman, who advancedtowards him with clasped hands and a smile upon her lips.

　　"Valentine, Valentine!" he mentally ejaculated; but his lipsuttered no sound, and as though all his strength werecentred in that internal emotion, he sighed and closed hiseyes. Valentine rushed towards him; his lips again moved.

　　"He is calling you," said the count; "he to whom you haveconfided your destiny -- he from whom death would haveseparated you, calls you to him. Happily, I vanquisheddeath. Henceforth, Valentine, you will never again beseparated on earth, since he has rushed into death to findyou. Without me, you would both have died. May God accept myatonement in the preservation of these two existences!"

　　Valentine seized the count's hand, and in her irresistibleimpulse of joy carried it to her lips.

　　"Oh, thank me again!" said the count; "tell me till you areweary, that I have restored you to happiness; you do notknow how much I require this assurance."

　　"Oh, yes, yes, I thank you with all my heart," saidValentine; "and if you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude,oh, then, ask Haidee! ask my beloved sister Haidee, who eversince our departure from France, has caused me to waitpatiently for this happy day, while talking to me of you."

　　"You then love Haidee?" asked Monte Cristo with an emotionhe in vain endeavored to dissimulate.

　　"Oh, yes, with all my soul."

　　"Well, then, listen, Valentine," said the count; "I have afavor to ask of you."

　　"Of me? Oh, am I happy enough for that?"

　　"Yes; you have called Haidee your sister, -- let her becomeso indeed, Valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancythat you owe to me; protect her, for" (the count's voice wasthick with emotion) "henceforth she will be alone in theworld."

　　"Alone in the world!" repeated a voice behind the count,"and why?"

　　Monte Cristo turned around; Haidee was standing pale,motionless, looking at the count with an expression offearful amazement.

　　"Because to-morrow, Haidee, you will be free; you will thenassume your proper position in society, for I will not allowmy destiny to overshadow yours. Daughter of a prince, Irestore to you the riches and name of your father."

　　Haidee became pale, and lifting her transparent hands toheaven, exclaimed in a voice stifled with tears, "Then youleave me, my lord?"

　　"Haidee, Haidee, you are young and beautiful; forget even myname, and be happy."

　　"It is well," said Haidee; "your order shall be executed, mylord; I will forget even your name, and be happy." And shestepped back to retire.

　　"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting thehead of Morrel on her shoulder, "do you not see how pale sheis? Do you not see how she suffers?"

　　Haidee answered with a heartrending expression, "Why shouldhe understand this, my sister? He is my master, and I am hisslave; he has the right to notice nothing."

　　The count shuddered at the tones of a voice which penetratedthe inmost recesses of his heart; his eyes met those of theyoung girl and he could not bear their brilliancy. "Oh,heavens," exclaimed Monte Cristo, "can my suspicions becorrect? Haidee, would it please you not to leave me?"

　　"I am young," gently replied Haidee; "I love the life youhave made so sweet to me, and I should be sorry to die."

　　"You mean, then, that if I leave you, Haidee" --

　　"I should die; yes, my lord."

　　"Do you then love me?"

　　"Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him. Valentine, tell himif you love Maximilian." The count felt his heart dilate andthrob; he opened his arms, and Haidee, uttering a cry,sprang into them. "Oh, yes," she cried, "I do love you! Ilove you as one loves a father, brother, husband! I love youas my life, for you are the best, the noblest of createdbeings!"

　　"Let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; God hassustained me in my struggle with my enemies, and has givenme this reward; he will not let me end my triumph insuffering; I wished to punish myself, but he has pardonedme. Love me then, Haidee! Who knows? perhaps your love willmake me forget all that I do not wish to remember."

　　"What do you mean, my lord?"

　　"I mean that one word from you has enlightened me more thantwenty years of slow experience; I have but you in theworld, Haidee; through you I again take hold on life,through you I shall suffer, through you rejoice."

　　"Do you hear him, Valentine?" exclaimed Haidee; "he saysthat through me he will suffer -- through me, who wouldyield my life for his." The count withdrew for a moment."Have I discovered the truth?" he said; "but whether it befor recompense or punishment, I accept my fate. Come,Haidee, come!" and throwing his arm around the young girl'swaist, he pressed the hand of Valentine, and disappeared.

　　An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine,breathless and motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel.At length she felt his heart beat, a faint breath playedupon his lips, a slight shudder, announcing the return oflife, passed through the young man's frame. At length hiseyes opened, but they were at first fixed andexpressionless; then sight returned, and with it feeling andgrief. "Oh," he cried, in an accent of despair, "the counthas deceived me; I am yet living; "and extending his handtowards the table, he seized a knife.

　　"Dearest," exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile,"awake, and look at me!" Morrel uttered a loud exclamation,and frantic, doubtful, dazzled, as though by a celestialvision, he fell upon his knees.

　　The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel werewalking arm-in-arm on the sea-shore, Valentine relating howMonte Cristo had appeared in her room, explained everything,revealed the crime, and, finally, how he had saved her lifeby enabling her to simulate death. They had found the doorof the grotto opened, and gone forth; on the azure dome ofheaven still glittered a few remaining stars. Morrel soonperceived a man standing among the rocks, apparentlyawaiting a sign from them to advance, and pointed him out toValentine. "Ah, it is Jacopo," she said, "the captain of theyacht; "and she beckoned him towards them.

　　"Do you wish to speak to us?" asked Morrel.

　　"I have a letter to give you from the count."

　　"From the count!" murmured the two young people.

　　"Yes; read it." Morrel opened the letter, and read: --

　　"My Dear Maximilian, --

　　"There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry youto Leghorn, where Monsieur Noirtier awaits hisgranddaughter, whom he wishes to bless before you lead herto the altar. All that is in this grotto, my friend, myhouse in the Champs Elysees, and my chateau at Treport, arethe marriage gifts bestowed by Edmond Dantes upon the son ofhis old master, Morrel. Mademoiselle de Villefort will sharethem with you; for I entreat her to give to the poor theimmense fortune reverting to her from her father, now amadman, and her brother who died last September with hismother. Tell the angel who will watch over your futuredestiny, Morrel, to pray sometimes for a man, who like Satanthought himself for an instant equal to God, but who nowacknowledges with Christian humility that God alonepossesses supreme power and infinite wisdom. Perhaps thoseprayers may soften the remorse he feels in his heart. As foryou, Morrel, this is the secret of my conduct towards you.There is neither happiness nor misery in the world; there isonly the comparison of one state with another, nothing more.He who has felt the deepest grief is best able to experiencesupreme happiness. We must have felt what it is to die,Morrel, that we may appreciate the enjoyments of living.

　　"Live, then, and be happy, beloved children of my heart, andnever forget that until the day when God shall deign toreveal the future to man, all human wisdom is summed up inthese two words, -- `Wait and hope.' Your friend,

　　"Edmond Dantes, Count of Monte Cristo."

　　During the perusal of this letter, which informed Valentinefor the first time of the madness of her father and thedeath of her brother, she became pale, a heavy sigh escapedfrom her bosom, and tears, not the less painful because theywere silent, ran down her cheeks; her happiness cost hervery dear. Morrel looked around uneasily. "But," he said,"the count's generosity is too overwhelming; Valentine willbe satisfied with my humble fortune. Where is the count,friend? Lead me to him." Jacopo pointed towards the horizon."What do you mean?" asked Valentine. "Where is the count? --where is Haidee?"

　　"Look!" said Jacopo.

　　The eyes of both were fixed upon the spot indicated by thesailor, and on the blue line separating the sky from theMediterranean Sea, they perceived a large white sail."Gone," said Morrel; "gone! -- adieu, my friend -- adieu, myfather!"

　　"Gone," murmured Valentine; "adieu, my sweet Haidee --adieu, my sister!"

　　"Who can say whether we shall ever see them again?" saidMorrel with tearful eyes.

　　"Darling," replied Valentine, "has not the count just toldus that all human wisdom is summed up in two words? -- `Waitand hope.'"

　　End

　　Chapter 100The Apparition.

　　As the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine was notyet recovered. Bowed down with fatigue, she was indeedconfined to her bed; and it was in her own room, and fromthe lips of Madame de Villefort, that she heard all thestrange events we have related, -- we mean the flight ofEugenie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, or ratherBenedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronouncedagainst him. But Valentine was so weak that this recitalscarcely produced the same effect it would have done had shebeen in her usual state of health. Indeed, her brain wasonly the seat of vague ideas, and confused forms, mingledwith strange fancies, alone presented themselves before hereyes.

　　During the daytime Valentine's perceptions remainedtolerably clear, owing to the constant presence of M.Noirtier, who caused himself to be carried to hisgranddaughter's room, and watched her with his paternaltenderness; Villefort also, on his return from the lawcourts, frequently passed an hour or two with his father andchild. At six o'clock Villefort retired to his study, ateight M. d'Avrigny himself arrived, bringing the nightdraught prepared for the young girl, and then M. Noirtierwas carried away. A nurse of the doctor's choice succeededthem, and never left till about ten or eleven o'clock, whenValentine was asleep. As she went down-stairs she gave thekeys of Valentine's room to M. de Villefort, so that no onecould reach the sick-room excepting through that of Madamede Villefort and little Edward.

　　Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news ofValentine, and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day foundhim less uneasy. Certainly, though Valentine still laboredunder dreadful nervous excitement, she was better; andmoreover, Monte Cristo had told him when, half distracted,he had rushed to the count's house, that if she were notdead in two hours she would be saved. Now four days hadelapsed, and Valentine still lived.

　　The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentineeven in her sleep, or rather in that state of somnolencewhich succeeded her waking hours; it was then, in thesilence of night, in the dim light shed from the alabasterlamp on the chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass andrepass which hover over the bed of sickness, and fan thefever with their trembling wings. First she fancied she sawher stepmother threatening her, then Morrel stretched hisarms towards her; sometimes mere strangers, like the Countof Monte Cristo came to visit her; even the very furniture,in these moments of delirium, seemed to move, and this statelasted till about three o'clock in the morning, when a deep,heavy slumber overcame the young girl, from which she didnot awake till daylight. On the evening of the day on whichValentine had learned of the flight of Eugenie and thearrest of Benedetto, -- Villefort having retired as well asNoirtier and d'Avrigny, -- her thoughts wandered in aconfused maze, alternately reviewing her own situation andthe events she had just heard.

　　Eleven o'clock had struck. The nurse, having placed thebeverage prepared by the doctor within reach of the patient,and locked the door, was listening with terror to thecomments of the servants in the kitchen, and storing hermemory with all the horrible stories which had for somemonths past amused the occupants of the ante-chambers in thehouse of the king's attorney. Meanwhile an unexpected scenewas passing in the room which had been so carefully locked.Ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left; Valentine,who for the last hour had been suffering from the feverwhich returned nightly, incapable of controlling her ideas,was forced to yield to the excitement which exhausted itselfin producing and reproducing a succession and recurrence ofthe same fancies and images. The night-lamp threw outcountless rays, each resolving itself into some strange formto her disordered imagination, when suddenly by itsflickering light Valentine thought she saw the door of herlibrary, which was in the recess by the chimney-piece, openslowly, though she in vain listened for the sound of thehinges on which it turned.

　　At any other time Valentine would have seized the silkenbell-pull and summoned assistance, but nothing astonishedher in her present situation. Her reason told her that allthe visions she beheld were but the children of herimagination, and the conviction was strengthened by the factthat in the morning no traces remained of the nocturnalphantoms, who disappeared with the coming of daylight. Frombehind the door a human figure appeared, but the girl wastoo familiar with such apparitions to be alarmed, andtherefore only stared, hoping to recognize Morrel. Thefigure advanced towards the bed and appeared to listen withprofound attention. At this moment a ray of light glancedacross the face of the midnight visitor.

　　"It is not he," she murmured, and waited, in the assurancethat this was but a dream, for the man to disappear orassume some other form. Still, she felt her pulse, andfinding it throb violently she remembered that the bestmethod of dispelling such illusions was to drink, for adraught of the beverage prepared by the doctor to allay herfever seemed to cause a reaction of the brain, and for ashort time she suffered less. Valentine therefore reachedher hand towards the glass, but as soon as her trembling armleft the bed the apparition advanced more quickly towardsher, and approached the young girl so closely that shefancied she heard his breath, and felt the pressure of hishand.

　　This time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassedanything Valentine had before experienced; she began tobelieve herself really alive and awake, and the belief thather reason was this time not deceived made her shudder. Thepressure she felt was evidently intended to arrest her arm,and she slowly withdrew it. Then the figure, from whom shecould not detach her eyes, and who appeared more protectingthan menacing, took the glass, and walking towards thenight-light held it up, as if to test its transparency. Thisdid not seem sufficient; the man, or rather the ghost -- forhe trod so softly that no sound was heard -- then poured outabout a spoonful into the glass, and drank it. Valentinewitnessed this scene with a sentiment of stupefaction. Everyminute she had expected that it would vanish and give placeto another vision; but the man, instead of dissolving like ashadow, again approached her, and said in an agitated voice,"Now you may drink."

　　Valentine shuddered. It was the first time one of thesevisions had ever addressed her in a living voice, and shewas about to utter an exclamation. The man placed his fingeron her lips. "The Count of Monte Cristo!" she murmured.

　　It was easy to see that no doubt now remained in the younggirl's mind as to the reality of the scene; her eyes startedwith terror, her hands trembled, and she rapidly drew thebedclothes closer to her. Still, the presence of MonteCristo at such an hour, his mysterious, fanciful, andextraordinary entrance into her room through the wall, mightwell seem impossibilities to her shattered reason. "Do notcall any one -- do not be alarmed," said the Count; "do notlet a shade of suspicion or uneasiness remain in yourbreast; the man standing before you, Valentine (for thistime it is no ghost), is nothing more than the tenderestfather and the most respectful friend you could dream of."

　　Valentine could not reply; the voice which indicated thereal presence of a being in the room, alarmed her so muchthat she feared to utter a syllable; still the expression ofher eyes seemed to inquire, "If your intentions are pure,why are you here?" The count's marvellous sagacityunderstood all that was passing in the young girl's mind.

　　"Listen to me," he said, "or, rather, look upon me; look atmy face, paler even than usual, and my eyes, red withweariness -- for four days I have not closed them, for Ihave been constantly watching you, to protect and preserveyou for Maximilian." The blood mounted rapidly to the cheeksof Valentine, for the name just announced by the countdispelled all the fear with which his presence had inspiredher. "Maximilian!" she exclaimed, and so sweet did the soundappear to her, that she repeated it -- "Maximilian! -- hashe then owned all to you?"

　　"Everything. He told me your life was his, and I havepromised him that you shall live."

　　"You have promised him that I shall live?"

　　"Yes."

　　"But, sir, you spoke of vigilance and protection. Are you adoctor?"

　　"Yes; the best you could have at the present time, believeme."

　　"But you say you have watched?" said Valentine uneasily;"where have you been? -- I have not seen you." The countextended his hand towards the library. "I was hidden behindthat door," he said, "which leads into the next house, whichI have rented." Valentine turned her eyes away, and, with anindignant expression of pride and modest fear, exclaimed:"Sir, I think you have been guilty of an unparalleledintrusion, and that what you call protection is more like aninsult."

　　"Valentine," he answered, "during my long watch over you,all I have observed has been what people visited you, whatnourishment was prepared, and what beverage was served;then, when the latter appeared dangerous to me, I entered,as I have now done, and substituted, in the place of thepoison, a healthful draught; which, instead of producing thedeath intended, caused life to circulate in your veins."

　　"Poison -- death!" exclaimed Valentine, half believingherself under the influence of some feverish hallucination;"what are you saying, sir?"

　　"Hush, my child," said Monte Cristo, again placing hisfinger upon her lips, "I did say poison and death. But drinksome of this;" and the count took a bottle from his pocket,containing a red liquid, of which he poured a few drops intothe glass. "Drink this, and then take nothing moreto-night." Valentine stretched out her hand, but scarcelyhad she touched the glass when she drew back in fear. MonteCristo took the glass, drank half its contents, and thenpresented it to Valentine, who smiled and swallowed therest. "Oh, yes," she exclaimed, "I recognize the flavor ofmy nocturnal beverage which refreshed me so much, and seemedto ease my aching brain. Thank you, sir, thank you!"

　　"This is how you have lived during the last four nights,Valentine," said the count. "But, oh, how I passed thattime! Oh, the wretched hours I have endured -- the tortureto which I have submitted when I saw the deadly poisonpoured into your glass, and how I trembled lest you shoulddrink it before I could find time to throw it away!"

　　"Sir," said Valentine, at the height of her terror, "you sayyou endured tortures when you saw the deadly poison pouredinto my glass; but if you saw this, you must also have seenthe person who poured it?"

　　"Yes." Valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over herchest, which appeared whiter than snow, the embroideredcambric, still moist with the cold dews of delirium, towhich were now added those of terror. "You saw the person?"repeated the young girl. "Yes," repeated the count.

　　"What you tell me is horrible, sir. You wish to make mebelieve something too dreadful. What? -- attempt to murderme in my father's house, in my room, on my bed of sickness?Oh, leave me, sir; you are tempting me -- you make me doubtthe goodness of providence -- it is impossible, it cannotbe!"

　　"Are you the first that this hand has stricken? Have you notseen M. de Saint-Meran, Madame de Saint-Meran, Barrois, allfall? would not M. Noirtier also have fallen a victim, hadnot the treatment he has been pursuing for the last threeyears neutralized the effects of the poison?"

　　"Oh, heaven," said Valentine; "is this the reason whygrandpapa has made me share all his beverages during thelast month?"

　　"And have they all tasted of a slightly bitter flavor, likethat of dried orange-peel?"

　　"Oh, yes, yes!"

　　"Then that explains all," said Monte Cristo. "Yourgrandfather knows, then, that a poisoner lives here; perhapshe even suspects the person. He has been fortifying you, hisbeloved child, against the fatal effects of the poison,which has failed because your system was already impregnatedwith it. But even this would have availed little against amore deadly medium of death employed four days ago, which isgenerally but too fatal."

　　"But who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?"

　　"Let me also ask you a question. Have you never seen any oneenter your room at night?"

　　"Oh, yes; I have frequently seen shadows pass close to me,approach, and disappear; but I took them for visions raisedby my feverish imagination, and indeed when you entered Ithought I was under the influence of delirium."

　　"Then you do not know who it is that attempts your life?"

　　"No," said Valentine; "who could desire my death?"

　　"You shall know it now, then," said Monte Cristo, listening.

　　"How do you mean?" said Valentine, looking anxiously around.

　　"Because you are not feverish or delirious to-night, butthoroughly awake; midnight is striking, which is the hourmurderers choose."

　　"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the dropswhich ran down her forehead. Midnight struck slowly andsadly; every hour seemed to strike with leaden weight uponthe heart of the poor girl. "Valentine," said the count,"summon up all your courage; still the beatings of yourheart; do not let a sound escape you, and feign to beasleep; then you will see." Valentine seized the count'shand. "I think I hear a noise," she said; "leave me."

　　"Good-by, for the present," replied the count, walking upontiptoe towards the library door, and smiling with anexpression so sad and paternal that the young girl's heartwas filled with gratitude. Before closing the door he turnedaround once more, and said, "Not a movement -- not a word;let them think you asleep, or perhaps you may be killedbefore I have the power of helping you." And with thisfearful injunction the count disappeared through the door,which noiselessly closed after him.

　　Chapter 101Locusta.

　　Valentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that ofSaint-Philippe du Roule, struck the hour of midnight fromdifferent directions, and excepting the rumbling of a fewcarriages all was silent. Then Valentine's attention wasengrossed by the clock in her room, which marked theseconds. She began counting them, remarking that they weremuch slower than the beatings of her heart; and still shedoubted, -- the inoffensive Valentine could not imagine thatany one should desire her death. Why should they? To whatend? What had she done to excite the malice of an enemy?There was no fear of her falling asleep. One terrible ideapressed upon her mind, -- that some one existed in the worldwho had attempted to assassinate her, and who was about toendeavor to do so again. Supposing this person, wearied atthe inefficacy of the poison, should, as Monte Cristointimated, have recourse to steel! -- What if the countshould have no time to run to her rescue! -- What if herlast moments were approaching, and she should never againsee Morrel! When this terrible chain of ideas presenteditself, Valentine was nearly persuaded to ring the bell, andcall for help. But through the door she fancied she saw theluminous eye of the count -- that eye which lived in hermemory, and the recollection overwhelmed her with so muchshame that she asked herself whether any amount of gratitudecould ever repay his adventurous and devoted friendship.

　　Twenty minutes, twenty tedious minutes, passed thus, thenten more, and at last the clock struck the half-flour. Justthen the sound of finger-nails slightly grating against thedoor of the library informed Valentine that the count wasstill watching, and recommended her to do the same; at thesame time, on the opposite side, that is towards Edward'sroom, Valentine fancied that she heard the creaking of thefloor; she listened attentively, holding her breath till shewas nearly suffocated; the lock turned, and the door slowlyopened. Valentine had raised herself upon her elbow, and hadscarcely time to throw herself down on the bed and shade hereyes with her arm; then, trembling, agitated, and her heartbeating with indescribable terror, she awaited the event.

　　Some one approached the bed and drew back the curtains.Valentine summoned every effort, and breathed with thatregular respiration which announces tranquil sleep."Valentine!" said a low voice. Still silent: Valentine hadpromised not to awake. Then everything was still, exceptingthat Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of someliquid being poured into the glass she had just emptied.Then she ventured to open her eyelids, and glance over herextended arm. She saw a woman in a white dressing-gownpouring a liquor from a phial into her glass. During thisshort time Valentine must have held her breath, or moved insome slight degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped andleaned over the bed, in order the better to ascertainwhether Valentine slept -- it was Madame de Villefort.

　　On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repressa shudder, which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame deVillefort instantly stepped back close to the wall, andthere, shaded by the bed-curtains, she silently andattentively watched the slightest movement of Valentine. Thelatter recollected the terrible caution of Monte Cristo; shefancied that the hand not holding the phial clasped a longsharp knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength, sheforced herself to close her eyes; but this simple operationupon the most delicate organs of our frame, generally soeasy to accomplish, became almost impossible at this moment,so much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open andlearn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured bythe silence, which was alone disturbed by the regularbreathing of Valentine, again extended her hand, and halfhidden by the curtains succeeded in emptying the contents ofthe phial into the glass. Then she retired so gently thatValentine did not know she had left the room. She onlywitnessed the withdrawal of the arm -- the fair round arm ofa woman but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread deatharound her.

　　It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced byValentine during the minute and a half Madame de Villefortremained in the room. The grating against the library-dooraroused the young girl from the stupor in which she wasplunged, and which almost amounted to insensibility. Sheraised her head with an effort. The noiseless door againturned on its hinges, and the Count of Monte Cristoreappeared. "Well," said he, "do you still doubt?"

　　"Oh," murmured the young girl.

　　"Have you seen?"

　　"Alas!"

　　"Did you recognize?" Valentine groaned. "Oh, yes;" she said,"I saw, but I cannot believe!"

　　"Would you rather die, then, and cause Maximilian's death?"

　　"Oh," repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, "can I notleave the house? -- can I not escape?"

　　"Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue youeverywhere; your servants will be seduced with gold, anddeath will be offered to you disguised in every shape. Youwill find it in the water you drink from the spring, in thefruit you pluck from the tree."

　　"But did you not say that my kind grandfather's precautionhad neutralized the poison?"

　　"Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will bechanged, and the quantity increased." He took the glass andraised it to his lips. "It is already done," he said;"brucine is no longer employed, but a simple narcotic! I canrecognize the flavor of the alcohol in which it has beendissolved. If you had taken what Madame de Villefort haspoured into your glass, Valentine -- Valentine -- you wouldhave been doomed!"

　　"But," exclaimed the young girl, "why am I thus pursued?"

　　"Why? -- are you so kind -- so good -- so unsuspicious ofill, that you cannot understand, Valentine?"

　　"No, I have never injured her."

　　"But you are rich, Valentine; you have 200,000 livres ayear, and you prevent her son from enjoying these 200,000livres."

　　"How so? The fortune is not her gift, but is inherited frommy relations."

　　"Certainly; and that is why M. and Madame de Saint-Meranhave died; that is why M. Noirtier was sentenced the day hemade you his heir; that is why you, in your turn, are to die-- it is because your father would inherit your property,and your brother, his only son, succeed to his."

　　"Edward? Poor child! Are all these crimes committed on hisaccount?"

　　"Ah, then you at length understand?"

　　"Heaven grant that this may not be visited upon him!"

　　"Valentine, you are an angel!"

　　"But why is my grandfather allowed to live?"

　　"It was considered, that you dead, the fortune wouldnaturally revert to your brother, unless he weredisinherited; and besides, the crime appearing useless, itwould be folly to commit it."

　　"And is it possible that this frightful combination ofcrimes has been invented by a woman?"

　　"Do you recollect in the arbor of the Hotel des Postes, atPerugia, seeing a man in a brown cloak, whom your stepmotherwas questioning upon aqua tofana? Well, ever since then, theinfernal project has been ripening in her brain."

　　"Ah, then, indeed, sir," said the sweet girl, bathed intears, "I see that I am condemned to die!"

　　"No, Valentine, for I have foreseen all their plots; no,your enemy is conquered since we know her, and you willlive, Valentine -- live to be happy yourself, and to conferhappiness upon a noble heart; but to insure this you mustrely on me."

　　"Command me, sir -- what am I to do?"

　　"You must blindly take what I give you."

　　"Alas, were it only for my own sake, I should prefer todie!"

　　"You must not confide in any one -- not even in yourfather."

　　"My father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?"asked Valentine, clasping her hands.

　　"No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicialaccusations, ought to have known that all these deaths havenot happened naturally; it is he who should have watchedover you -- he should have occupied my place -- he shouldhave emptied that glass -- he should have risen against theassassin. Spectre against spectre!" he murmured in a lowvoice, as he concluded his sentence.

　　"Sir," said Valentine, "I will do all I can to live. forthere are two beings whose existence depends upon mine -- mygrandfather and Maximilian."

　　"I will watch over them as I have over you."

　　"Well, sir, do as you will with me;" and then she added, ina low voice, "oh, heavens, what will befall me?"

　　"Whatever may happen, Valentine, do not be alarmed; thoughyou suffer; though you lose sight, hearing, consciousness,fear nothing; though you should awake and be ignorant whereyou are, still do not fear; even though you should findyourself in a sepulchral vault or coffin. Reassure yourself,then, and say to yourself: `At this moment, a friend, afather, who lives for my happiness and that of Maximilian,watches over me!'"

　　"Alas, alas, what a fearful extremity!"

　　"Valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?"

　　"I would rather die a hundred times -- oh, yes, die!"

　　"No, you will not die; but will you promise me, whateverhappens, that you will not complain, but hope?"

　　"I will think of Maximilian!"

　　"You are my own darling child, Valentine! I alone can saveyou, and I will." Valentine in the extremity of her terrorjoined her hands, -- for she felt that the moment hadarrived to ask for courage, -- and began to pray, and whileuttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot thather white shoulders had no other covering than her longhair, and that the pulsations of her heart could he seenthrough the lace of her nightdress. Monte Cristo gently laidhis hand on the young girl's arm, drew the velvet coverletclose to her throat, and said with a paternal smile, -- "Mychild, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in thegoodness of providence and the love of Maximilian."

　　Then he drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emeraldbox, raised the golden lid, and took from it a pastilleabout the size of a pea, which he placed in her hand. Shetook it, and looked attentively on the count; there was anexpression on the face of her intrepid protector whichcommanded her veneration. She evidently interrogated him byher look. "Yes," said he. Valentine carried the pastille toher mouth, and swallowed it. "And now, my dear child, adieufor the present. I will try and gain a little sleep, for youare saved."

　　"Go," said Valentine, "whatever happens, I promise you notto fear."

　　Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the younggirl, who gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects ofthe narcotic the count had given her. Then he took theglass, emptied three parts of the contents in the fireplace,that it might be supposed Valentine had taken it, andreplaced it on the table; then he disappeared, afterthrowing a farewell glance on Valentine, who slept with theconfidence and innocence of an angel.

　　Chapter 102Valentine.

　　The night-light continued to burn on the chimney-piece,exhausting the last drops of oil which floated on thesurface of the water. The globe of the lamp appeared of areddish hue, and the flame, brightening before it expired,threw out the last flickerings which in an inanimate objecthave been so often compared with the convulsions of a humancreature in its final agonies. A dull and dismal light wasshed over the bedclothes and curtains surrounding the younggirl. All noise in the streets had ceased, and the silencewas frightful. It was then that the door of Edward's roomopened, and a head we have before noticed appeared in theglass opposite; it was Madame de Villefort, who came towitness the effects of the drink she had prepared. Shestopped in the doorway, listened for a moment to theflickering of the lamp, the only sound in that desertedroom, and then advanced to the table to see if Valentine'sglass were empty. It was still about a quarter full, as webefore stated. Madame de Villefort emptied the contents intothe ashes, which she disturbed that they might the morereadily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed theglass, and wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it onthe table.

　　If any one could have looked into the room just then hewould have noticed the hesitation with which Madame deVillefort approached the bed and looked fixedly onValentine. The dim light, the profound silence, and thegloomy thoughts inspired by the hour, and still more by herown conscience, all combined to produce a sensation of fear;the poisoner was terrified at the contemplation of her ownwork. At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, andleaning over the pillow gazed intently on Valentine. Theyoung girl no longer breathed, no breath issued through thehalf-closed teeth; the white lips no longer quivered -- theeyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the long blacklashes rested on a cheek white as wax. Madame de Villefortgazed upon the face so expressive even in its stillness;then she ventured to raise the coverlet and press her handupon the young girl's heart. It was cold and motionless. Sheonly felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and withdrew herhand with a shudder. One arm was hanging out of the bed;from shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms ofGermain Pillon's "Graces,"* but the fore-arm seemed to beslightly distorted by convulsion, and the hand, sodelicately formed, was resting with stiff outstretchedfingers on the framework of the bed. The nails, too, wereturning blue.

　　* Germain Pillon was a famous French sculptor (1535-1598).His best known work is "The Three Graces," now in theLouvre.

　　Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over --she had consummated the last terrible work she had toaccomplish. There was no more to do in the room, so thepoisoner retired stealthily, as though fearing to hear thesound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she stillheld aside the curtain, absorbed in the irresistibleattraction always exerted by the picture of death, so longas it is merely mysterious and does not excite disgust. Justthen the lamp again flickered; the noise startled Madame deVillefort, who shuddered and dropped the curtain.Immediately afterwards the light expired, and the room wasplunged in frightful obscurity, while the clock at thatminute struck half-past four. Overpowered with agitation,the poisoner succeeded in groping her way to the door, andreached her room in an agony of fear.

　　The darkness lasted two hours longer; then by degrees a coldlight crept through the Venetian blinds, until at length itrevealed the objects in the room. About this time thenurse's cough was heard on the stairs and the woman enteredthe room with a cup in her hand. To the tender eye of afather or a lover, the first glance would have sufficed toreveal Valentine's condition; but to this hireling,Valentine only appeared to sleep. "Good," she exclaimed,approaching the table, "she has taken part of her draught;the glass is three-quarters empty."

　　Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, andalthough she had just left her bed, she could not resist thetemptation offered by Valentine's sleep, so she threwherself into an arm-chair to snatch a little more rest. Theclock striking eight awoke her. Astonished at the prolongedslumber of the patient, and frightened to see that the armwas still hanging out of the bed, she advanced towardsValentine, and for the first time noticed the white lips.She tried to replace the arm, but it moved with a frightfulrigidity which could not deceive a sick-nurse. She screamedaloud; then running to the door exclaimed, -- "Help, help!"

　　"What is the matter?" asked M. d'Avrigny, at the foot of thestairs, it being the hour he usually visited her.

　　"What is it?" asked Villefort, rushing from his room."Doctor, do you hear them call for help?"

　　"Yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in Valentine's room."But before the doctor and the father could reach the room,the servants who were on the same floor had entered, andseeing Valentine pale and motionless on her bed, they liftedup their hands towards heaven and stood transfixed, asthough struck by lightening. "Call Madame de Villefort! --wake Madame de Villefort!" cried the procureur from the doorof his chamber, which apparently he scarcely dared to leave.But instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching M.d'Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her in his arms."What? -- this one, too?" he exclaimed. "Oh, where will bethe end?" Villefort rushed into the room. "What are yousaying, doctor?" he exclaimed, raising his hands to heaven.

　　"I say that Valentine is dead!" replied d'Avrigny, in avoice terrible in its solemn calm.

　　M. de Villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed. Onthe exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, theservants all fled with muttered imprecations; they wereheard running down the stairs and through the long passages,then there was a rush in the court, afterwards all wasstill; they had, one and all, deserted the accursed house.Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the act of slipping onher dressing-gown, threw aside the drapery and for a momentstood motionless, as though interrogating the occupants ofthe room, while she endeavored to call up some rebellioustears. On a sudden she stepped, or rather bounded, withoutstretched arms, towards the table. She saw d'Avrignycuriously examining the glass, which she felt certain ofhaving emptied during the night. It was now a third full,just as it was when she threw the contents into the ashes.The spectre of Valentine rising before the poisoner wouldhave alarmed her less. It was, indeed, the same color as thedraught she had poured into the glass, and which Valentinehad drank; it was indeed the poison, which could not deceiveM. d'Avrigny, which he now examined so closely; it wasdoubtless a miracle from heaven, that, notwithstanding herprecautions, there should be some trace, some proofremaining to reveal the crime. While Madame de Villefortremained rooted to the spot like a statue of terror, andVillefort, with his head hidden in the bedclothes, sawnothing around him, d'Avrigny approached the window, that hemight the better examine the contents of the glass, anddipping the tip of his finger in, tasted it. "Ah," heexclaimed, "it is no longer brucine that is used; let me seewhat it is!"

　　Then he ran to one of the cupboards in Valentine's room,which had been transformed into a medicine closet, andtaking from its silver case a small bottle of nitric acid,dropped a little of it into the liquor, which immediatelychanged to a blood-red color. "Ah," exclaimed d'Avrigny, ina voice in which the horror of a judge unveiling the truthwas mingled with the delight of a student making adiscovery. Madame de Villefort was overpowered, her eyesfirst flashed and then swam, she staggered towards the doorand disappeared. Directly afterwards the distant sound of aheavy weight falling on the ground was heard, but no onepaid any attention to it; the nurse was engaged in watchingthe chemical analysis, and Villefort was still absorbed ingrief. M. d'Avrigny alone had followed Madame de Villefortwith his eyes, and watched her hurried retreat. He lifted upthe drapery over the entrance to Edward's room, and his eyereaching as far as Madame de Villefort's apartment, hebeheld her extended lifeless on the floor. "Go to theassistance of Madame de Villefort," he said to the nurse."Madame de Villefort is ill."

　　"But Mademoiselle de Villefort " -- stammered the nurse.

　　"Mademoiselle de Villefort no longer requires help," saidd'Avrigny, "since she is dead."

　　"Dead, -- dead!" groaned forth Villefort, in a paroxysm ofgrief, which was the more terrible from the novelty of thesensation in the iron heart of that man.

　　"Dead!" repeated a third voice. "Who said Valentine wasdead?"

　　The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at thedoor, pale and terror-stricken. This is what had happened.At the usual time, Morrel had presented himself at thelittle door leading to Noirtier's room. Contrary to custom,the door was open, and having no occasion to ring heentered. He waited for a moment in the hall and called for aservant to conduct him to M. Noirtier; but no one answered,the servants having, as we know, deserted the house. Morrelhad no particular reason for uneasiness; Monte Cristo hadpromised him that Valentine should live, and so far he hadalways fulfilled his word. Every night the count had givenhim news, which was the next morning confirmed by Noirtier.Still this extraordinary silence appeared strange to him,and he called a second and third time; still no answer. Thenhe determined to go up. Noirtier's room was opened, like allthe rest. The first thing he saw was the old man sitting inhis arm-chair in his usual place, but his eyes expressedalarm, which was confirmed by the pallor which overspreadhis features.

　　"How are you, sir?" asked Morrel, with a sickness of heart.

　　"Well," answered the old man, by closing his eyes; but hisappearance manifested increasing uneasiness.

　　"You are thoughtful, sir," continued Morrel; "you wantsomething; shall I call one of the servants?"

　　"Yes," replied Noirtier.

　　Morrel pulled the bell, but though he nearly broke the cordno one answered. He turned towards Noirtier; the pallor andanguish expressed on his countenance momentarily increased.

　　"Oh," exclaimed Morrel, "why do they not come? Is any oneill in the house?" The eyes of Noirtier seemed as thoughthey would start from their sockets. "What is the matter?You alarm me. Valentine? Valentine?"

　　"Yes, yes," signed Noirtier. Maximilian tried to speak, buthe could articulate nothing; he staggered, and supportedhimself against the wainscot. Then he pointed to the door.

　　"Yes, yes, yes!" continued the old man. Maximilian rushed upthe little staircase, while Noirtier's eyes seemed to say,-- "Quicker, quicker!"

　　In a minute the young man darted through several rooms, tillat length he reached Valentine's. There was no occasion topush the door, it was wide open. A sob was the only sound heheard. He saw as though in a mist, a black figure kneelingand buried in a confused mass of white drapery. A terriblefear transfixed him. It was then he heard a voice exclaim"Valentine is dead!" and another voice which, like an echorepeated, -- "Dead, -- dead!"

　　Chapter 103Maximilian.

　　Villefort rose, half ashamed of being surprised in such aparoxysm of grief. The terrible office he had held fortwenty-five years had succeeded in making him more or lessthan man. His glance, at first wandering, fixed itself uponMorrel. "Who are you, sir," he asked, "that forget that thisis not the manner to enter a house stricken with death? Go,sir, go!" But Morrel remained motionless; he could notdetach his eyes from that disordered bed, and the palecorpse of the young girl who was lying on it. "Go! -- do youhear?" said Villefort, while d'Avrigny advanced to leadMorrel out. Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse,gazed all around the room, then upon the two men; he openedhis mouth to speak, but finding it impossible to giveutterance to the innumerable ideas that occupied his brain,he went out, thrusting his hands through his hair in such amanner that Villefort and d'Avrigny, for a moment divertedfrom the engrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemedto say, -- "He is mad!"

　　But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneathan extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, withsuperhuman strength, the arm-chair containing Noirtierup-stairs. When he reached the landing he placed thearm-chair on the floor and rapidly rolled it intoValentine's room. This could only have been accomplished bymeans of unnatural strength supplied by powerful excitement.But the most fearful spectacle was Noirtier being pushedtowards the bed, his face expressing all his meaning, andhis eyes supplying the want of every other faculty. Thatpale face and flaming glance appeared to Villefort like afrightful apparition. Each time he had been brought intocontact with his father, something terrible had happened."See what they have done!" cried Morrel, with one handleaning on the back of the chair, and the other extendedtowards Valentine. "See, my father, see!"

　　Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on theyoung man, who, almost a stranger to him, called Noirtierhis father. At this moment the whole soul of the old manseemed centred in his eyes which became bloodshot; the veinsof the throat swelled; his cheeks and temples became purple,as though he was struck with epilepsy; nothing was wantingto complete this but the utterance of a cry. And the cryissued from his pores, if we may thus speak -- a cryfrightful in its silence. D'Avrigny rushed towards the oldman and made him inhale a powerful restorative.

　　"Sir," cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of theparalytic, "they ask me who I am, and what right I have tobe here. Oh, you know it, tell them, tell them!" And theyoung man's voice was choked by sobs. As for the old man,his chest heaved with his panting respiration. One couldhave thought that he was undergoing the agonies precedingdeath. At length, happier than the young man, who sobbedwithout weeping, tears glistened in the eyes of Noirtier."Tell them," said Morrel in a hoarse voice, "tell them thatI am her betrothed. Tell them she was my beloved, my noblegirl, my only blessing in the world. Tell them -- oh, tellthem, that corpse belongs to me!"

　　The young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, fellheavily on his knees before the bed, which his fingersgrasped with convulsive energy. D'Avrigny, unable to bearthe sight of this touching emotion, turned away; andVillefort, without seeking any further explanation, andattracted towards him by the irresistible magnetism whichdraws us towards those who have loved the people for whom wemourn, extended his hand towards the young man. But Morrelsaw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, andunable to weep vented his agony in groans as he bit thesheets. For some time nothing was heard in that chamber butsobs, exclamations, and prayers. At length Villefort, themost composed of all, spoke: "Sir," said he to Maximilian,"you say you loved Valentine, that you were betrothed toher. I knew nothing of this engagement, of this love, yet I,her father, forgive you, for I see that your grief is realand deep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for angerto find a place in my heart. But you see that the angel whomyou hoped for has left this earth -- she has nothing more todo with the adoration of men. Take a last farewell, sir, ofher sad remains; take the hand you expected to possess oncemore within your own, and then separate yourself from herforever. Valentine now requires only the ministrations ofthe priest."

　　"You are mistaken, sir," exclaimed Morrel, raising himselfon one knee, his heart pierced by a more acute pang than anyhe had yet felt -- "you are mistaken; Valentine, dying asshe has, not only requires a priest, but an avenger. You, M.de Villefort, send for the priest; I will be the avenger."

　　"What do you mean, sir?" asked Villefort, trembling at thenew idea inspired by the delirium of Morrel.

　　"I tell you, sir, that two persons exist in you; the fatherhas mourned sufficiently, now let the procureur fulfil hisoffice."

　　The eyes of Noirtier glistened, and d'Avrigny approached.

　　"Gentlemen," said Morrel, reading all that passed throughthe minds of the witnesses to the scene, "I know what I amsaying, and you know as well as I do what I am about to say-- Valentine has been assassinated!" Villefort hung hishead, d'Avrigny approached nearer, and Noirtier said "Yes"with his eyes. "Now, sir," continued Morrel, "in these daysno one can disappear by violent means without some inquiriesbeing made as to the cause of her disappearance, even wereshe not a young, beautiful, and adorable creature likeValentine. Mr. Procureur," said Morrel with increasingvehemence, "no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime; it isyour place to seek the assassin." The young man's implacableeyes interrogated Villefort, who, on his side, glanced fromNoirtier to d'Avrigny. But instead of finding sympathy inthe eyes of the doctor and his father, he only saw anexpression as inflexible as that of Maximilian. "Yes,"indicated the old man.

　　"Assuredly," said d'Avrigny.

　　"Sir," said Villefort, striving to struggle against thistriple force and his own emotion, -- "sir, you are deceived;no one commits crimes here. I am stricken by fate. It ishorrible, indeed, but no one assassinates."

　　The eyes of Noirtier lighted up with rage, and d'Avrignyprepared to speak. Morrel, however, extended his arm, andcommanded silence. "And I say that murders are committedhere," said Morrel, whose voice, though lower in tone, lostnone of its terrible distinctness: "I tell you that this isthe fourth victim within the last four months. I tell you,Valentine's life was attempted by poison four days ago,though she escaped, owing to the precautions of M. Noirtier.I tell you that the dose has been double, the poisonchanged, and that this time it has succeeded. I tell youthat you know these things as well as I do, since thisgentleman has forewarned you, both as a doctor and as afriend."

　　"Oh, you rave, sir," exclaimed Villefort, in vainendeavoring to escape the net in which he was taken.

　　"I rave?" said Morrel; "well, then, I appeal to M. d'Avrignyhimself. Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he utteredin the garden of this house on the night of Madame deSaint-Meran's death. You thought yourselves alone, andtalked about that tragical death, and the fatality youmentioned then is the same which has caused the murder ofValentine." Villefort and d'Avrigny exchanged looks. "Yes,yes," continued Morrel; "recall the scene, for the words youthought were only given to silence and solitude fell into myears. Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolencemanifested by M. de Villefort towards his own relations, Iought to have denounced him to the authorities; then Ishould not have been an accomplice to thy death, as I nowam, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shallbecome the avenger. This fourth murder is apparent to all,and if thy father abandon thee, Valentine, it is I, and Iswear it, that shall pursue the assassin." And this time, asthough nature had at least taken compassion on the vigorousframe, nearly bursting with its own strength, the words ofMorrel were stifled in his throat; his breast heaved; thetears, so long rebellious, gushed from his eyes; and hethrew himself weeping on his knees by the side of the bed.

　　Then d'Avrigny spoke. "And I, too," he exclaimed in a lowvoice, "I unite with M. Morrel in demanding justice forcrime; my blood boils at the idea of having encouraged amurderer by my cowardly concession."

　　"Oh, merciful heavens!" murmured Villefort. Morrel raisedhis head, and reading the eyes of the old man, which gleamedwith unnatural lustre, -- "Stay," he said, "M. Noirtierwishes to speak."

　　"Yes," indicated Noirtier, with an expression the moreterrible, from all his faculties being centred in hisglance.

　　"Do you know the assassin?" asked Morrel.

　　"Yes," replied Noirtier.

　　"And will you direct us?" exclaimed the young man. "Listen,M. d'Avrigny, listen!" Noirtier looked upon Morrel with oneof those melancholy smiles which had so often made Valentinehappy, and thus fixed his attention. Then, having rivetedthe eyes of his interlocutor on his own, he glanced towardsthe door.

　　"Do you wish me to leave?" said Morrel, sadly.

　　"Yes," replied Noirtier.

　　"Alas, alas, sir, have pity on me!"

　　The old man's eyes remained fixed on the door.

　　"May I, at least, return?" asked Morrel.

　　"Yes."

　　"Must I leave alone?"

　　"No."

　　"Whom am I to take with me? The procureur?"

　　"No."

　　"The doctor?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You wish to remain alone with M. de Villefort?"

　　"Yes."

　　"But can he understand you?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Oh," said Villefort, inexpressibly delighted to think thatthe inquiries were to be made by him alone, -- "oh, besatisfied, I can understand my father." D'Avrigny took theyoung man's arm, and led him out of the room. A more thandeathlike silence then reigned in the house. At the end of aquarter of an hour a faltering footstep was heard, andVillefort appeared at the door of the apartment whered'Avrigny and Morrel had been staying, one absorbed inmeditation, the other in grief. "You can come," he said, andled them back to Noirtier. Morrel looked attentively onVillefort. His face was livid, large drops rolled down hisface, and in his fingers he held the fragments of a quillpen which he had torn to atoms.

　　"Gentlemen," he said in a hoarse voice, "give me your wordof honor that this horrible secret shall forever remainburied amongst ourselves!" The two men drew back.

　　"I entreat you." -- continued Villefort.

　　"But," said Morrel, "the culprit -- the murderer -- theassassin."

　　"Do not alarm yourself, sir; justice will be done," saidVillefort. "My father has revealed the culprit's name; myfather thirsts for revenge as much as you do, yet even heconjures you as I do to keep this secret. Do you not,father?"

　　"Yes," resolutely replied Noirtier. Morrel suffered anexclamation of horror and surprise to escape him. "Oh, sir,"said Villefort, arresting Maximilian by the arm, "if myfather, the inflexible man, makes this request, it isbecause he knows, be assured, that Valentine will beterribly revenged. Is it not so, father?" The old man made asign in the affirmative. Villefort continued: "He knows me,and I have pledged my word to him. Rest assured, gentlemen,that within three days, in a less time than justice woulddemand, the revenge I shall have taken for the murder of mychild will be such as to make the boldest heart tremble;"and as he spoke these words he ground his teeth, and graspedthe old man's senseless hand.

　　"Will this promise be fulfilled, M. Noirtier?" asked Morrel,while d'Avrigny looked inquiringly.

　　"Yes," replied Noirtier with an expression of sinister joy.

　　"Swear, then," said Villefort, joining the hands of Morreland d'Avrigny, "swear that you will spare the honor of myhouse, and leave me to avenge my child." D'Avrigny turnedround and uttered a very feeble "Yes," but Morrel,disengaging his hand, rushed to the bed, and after havingpressed the cold lips of Valentine with his own, hurriedlyleft, uttering a long, deep groan of despair and anguish. Wehave before stated that all the servants had fled. M. deVillefort was therefore obliged to request M. d'Avrigny tosuperintend all the arrangements consequent upon a death ina large city, more especially a death under such suspiciouscircumstances.

　　It was something terrible to witness the silent agony, themute despair of Noirtier, whose tears silently rolled downhis cheeks. Villefort retired to his study, and d'Avrignyleft to summon the doctor of the mayoralty, whose office itis to examine bodies after decease, and who is expresslynamed "the doctor of the dead." M. Noirtier could not bepersuaded to quit his grandchild. At the end of a quarter ofan hour M. d'Avrigny returned with his associate; they foundthe outer gate closed, and not a servant remaining in thehouse; Villefort himself was obliged to open to them. But hestopped on the landing; he had not the courage to againvisit the death chamber. The two doctors, therefore, enteredthe room alone. Noirtier was near the bed, pale, motionless,and silent as the corpse. The district doctor approachedwith the indifference of a man accustomed to spend half histime amongst the dead; he then lifted the sheet which wasplaced over the face, and just unclosed the lips.

　　"Alas," said d'Avrigny, "she is indeed dead, poor child!"

　　"Yes," answered the doctor laconically, dropping the sheethe had raised. Noirtier uttered a kind of hoarse, rattlingsound; the old man's eyes sparkled, and the good doctorunderstood that he wished to behold his child. He thereforeapproached the bed, and while his companion was dipping thefingers with which he had touched the lips of the corpse inchloride of lime, he uncovered the calm and pale face, whichlooked like that of a sleeping angel. A tear, which appearedin the old man's eye, expressed his thanks to the doctor.The doctor of the dead then laid his permit on the corner ofthe table, and having fulfilled his duty, was conducted outby d'Avrigny. Villefort met them at the door of his study;having in a few words thanked the district doctor, he turnedto d'Avrigny, and said, -- "And now the priest."

　　"Is there any particular priest you wish to pray withValentine?" asked d'Avrigny.

　　"No." said Villefort; "fetch the nearest."

　　"The nearest," said the district doctor, "is a good Italianabbe, who lives next door to you. Shall I call on him as Ipass?"

　　"D'Avrigny," said Villefort, "be so kind, I beseech you, asto accompany this gentleman. Here is the key of the door, sothat you can go in and out as you please; you will bring thepriest with you, and will oblige me by introducing him intomy child's room."

　　"Do you wish to see him?"

　　"I only wish to be alone. You will excuse me, will you not?A priest can understand a father's grief." And M. deVillefort, giving the key to d'Avrigny, again bade farewellto the strange doctor, and retired to his study, where hebegan to work. For some temperaments work is a remedy forall afflictions. As the doctors entered the street, they sawa man in a cassock standing on the threshold of the nextdoor. "This is the abbe of whom I spoke," said the doctor tod'Avrigny. D'Avrigny accosted the priest. "Sir," he said,"are you disposed to confer a great obligation on an unhappyfather who has just lost his daughter? I mean M. deVillefort, the king's attorney."

　　"Ah," said the priest, in a marked Italian accent; "yes, Ihave heard that death is in that house."

　　"Then I need not tell you what kind of service he requiresof you."

　　"I was about to offer myself, sir," said the priest; "it isour mission to forestall our duties."

　　"It is a young girl."

　　"I know it, sir; the servants who fled from the houseinformed me. I also know that her name is Valentine, and Ihave already prayed for her."

　　"Thank you, sir," said d'Avrigny; "since you have commencedyour sacred office, deign to continue it. Come and watch bythe dead, and all the wretched family will be grateful toyou."

　　"I am going, sir; and I do not hesitate to say that noprayers will be more fervent than mine." D'Avrigny took thepriest's hand, and without meeting Villefort, who wasengaged in his study, they reached Valentine's room, whichon the following night was to be occupied by theundertakers. On entering the room, Noirtier's eyes met thoseof the abbe, and no doubt he read some particular expressionin them, for he remained in the room. D'Avrigny recommendedthe attention of the priest to the living as well as to thedead, and the abbe promised to devote his prayers toValentine and his attentions to Noirtier. In order,doubtless, that he might not be disturbed while fulfillinghis sacred mission, the priest rose as soon as d'Avrignydeparted, and not only bolted the door through which thedoctor had just left, but also that leading to Madame deVillefort's room.

　　Chapter 104Danglars Signature.

　　The next morning dawned dull and cloudy. During the nightthe undertakers had executed their melancholy office, andwrapped the corpse in the winding-sheet, which, whatever maybe said about the equality of death, is at least a lastproof of the luxury so pleasing in life. This winding-sheetwas nothing more than a beautiful piece of cambric, whichthe young girl had bought a fortnight before. During theevening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carriedNoirtier from Valentine's room into his own, and contrary toall expectation there was no difficulty in withdrawing himfrom his child. The Abbe Busoni had watched till daylight,and then left without calling any one. D'Avrigny returnedabout eight o'clock in the morning; he met Villefort on hisway to Noirtier's room, and accompanied him to see how theold man had slept. They found him in the large arm-chair,which served him for a bed, enjoying a calm, nay, almost asmiling sleep. They both stood in amazement at the door.

　　"See," said d'Avrigny to Villefort, "nature knows how toalleviate the deepest sorrow. No one can say that M.Noirtier did not love his child, and yet he sleeps."

　　"Yes, you are right," replied Villefort, surprised; "hesleeps, indeed! And this is the more strange, since theleast contradiction keeps him awake all night."

　　"Grief has stunned him," replied d'Avrigny; and they bothreturned thoughtfully to the procureur's study.

　　"See, I have not slept," said Villefort, showing hisundisturbed bed; "grief does not stun me. I have not been inbed for two nights; but then look at my desk; see what Ihave written during these two days and nights. I have filledthose papers, and have made out the accusation against theassassin Benedetto. Oh, work, work, -- my passion, my joy,my delight, -- it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!" andhe convulsively grasped the hand of d'Avrigny.

　　"Do you require my services now?" asked d'Avrigny.

　　"No," said Villefort; "only return again at eleven o'clock;at twelve the -- the -- oh, heavens, my poor, poor child!"and the procureur again becoming a man, lifted up his eyesand groaned.

　　"Shall you be present in the reception room?"

　　"No; I have a cousin who has undertaken this sad office. Ishall work, doctor -- when I work I forget everything." And,indeed, no sooner had the doctor left the room, than he wasagain absorbed in study. On the doorsteps d'Avrigny met thecousin whom Villefort had mentioned, a personage asinsignificant in our story as in the world he occupied --one of those beings designed from their birth to makethemselves useful to others. He was punctual, dressed inblack, with crape around his hat, and presented himself athis cousin's with a face made up for the occasion, and whichhe could alter as might be required. At twelve o'clock themourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, and the Rue duFaubourg Saint-Honore was filled with a crowd of idlers,equally pleased to witness the festivities or the mourningof the rich, and who rush with the same avidity to a funeralprocession as to the marriage of a duchess.

　　Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our oldfriends made their appearance -- we mean Debray,Chateau-Renaud, and Beauchamp, accompanied by all theleading men of the day at the bar, in literature, or thearmy, for M. de Villefort moved in the first Parisiancircles, less owing to his social position than to hispersonal merit. The cousin standing at the door ushered inthe guests, and it was rather a relief to the indifferent tosee a person as unmoved as themselves, and who did not exacta mournful face or force tears, as would have been the casewith a father, a brother, or a lover. Those who wereacquainted soon formed into little groups. One of them wasmade of Debray, Chateau-Renaud, and Beauchamp.

　　"Poor girl," said Debray, like the rest, paying aninvoluntary tribute to the sad event, -- "poor girl, soyoung, so rich, so beautiful! Could you have imagined thisscene, Chateau-Renaud, when we saw her, at the most threeweeks ago, about to sign that contract?"

　　"Indeed, no," said Chateau-Renaud -- "Did you know her?"

　　"I spoke to her once or twice at Madame de Morcerf's, amongthe rest; she appeared to me charming, though rathermelancholy. Where is her stepmother? Do you know?"

　　"She is spending the day with the wife of the worthygentleman who is receiving us."

　　"Who is he?"

　　"Whom do you mean?"

　　"The gentleman who receives us? Is he a deputy?"

　　"Oh, no. I am condemned to witness those gentlemen everyday," said Beauchamp; "but he is perfectly unknown to me."

　　"Have you mentioned this death in your paper?"

　　"It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed,I doubt if it will please M. Villefort, for it says that iffour successive deaths had happened anywhere else than inthe house of the king's attorney, he would have interestedhimself somewhat more about it."

　　"Still," said Chateau-Renaud, "Dr. d'Avrigny, who attends mymother, declares he is in despair about it. But whom are youseeking, Debray?"

　　"I am seeking the Count of Monte Cristo" said the young man.

　　"I met him on the boulevard, on my way here," saidBeauchamp. "I think he is about to leave Paris; he was goingto his banker."

　　"His banker? Danglars is his banker, is he not?" askedChateau-Renaud of Debray.

　　"I believe so," replied the secretary with slightuneasiness. "But Monte Cristo is not the only one I misshere; I do not see Morrel."

　　"Morrel? Do they know him?" asked Chateau-Renaud. "I thinkhe has only been introduced to Madame de Villefort."

　　"Still, he ought to have been here," said Debray; "I wonderwhat will be talked about to-night; this funeral is the newsof the day. But hush, here comes our minister of justice; hewill feel obliged to make some little speech to the cousin,"and the three young men drew near to listen. Beauchamp toldthe truth when he said that on his way to the funeral he hadmet Monte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards theRue de la Chausse d'Antin, to M. Danglars'.

　　The banker saw the carriage of the count enter the courtyard, and advanced to meet him with a sad, though affablesmile. "Well," said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo,"I suppose you have come to sympathize with me, for indeedmisfortune has taken possession of my house. When Iperceived you, I was just asking myself whether I had notwished harm towards those poor Morcerfs, which would havejustified the proverb of `He who wishes misfortunes tohappen to others experiences them himself.' Well, on my wordof honor, I answered, `No!' I wished no ill to Morcerf; hewas a little proud, perhaps, for a man who like myself hasrisen from nothing; but we all have our faults. Do you know,count, that persons of our time of life -- not that youbelong to the class, you are still a young man, -- but as Iwas saying, persons of our time of life have been veryunfortunate this year. For example, look at the puritanicalprocureur, who has just lost his daughter, and in factnearly all his family, in so singular a manner; Morcerfdishonored and dead; and then myself covered with ridiculethrough the villany of Benedetto; besides" --

　　"Besides what?" asked the Count.

　　"Alas, do you not know?"

　　"What new calamity?"

　　"My daughter" --

　　"Mademoiselle Danglars?"

　　"Eugenie has left us!"

　　"Good heavens, what are you telling me?"

　　"The truth, my dear count. Oh, how happy you must be in nothaving either wife or children!"

　　"Do you think so?"

　　"Indeed I do."

　　"And so Mademoiselle Danglars" --

　　"She could not endure the insult offered to us by thatwretch, so she asked permission to travel."

　　"And is she gone?"

　　"The other night she left."

　　"With Madame Danglars?"

　　"No, with a relation. But still, we have quite lost our dearEugenie; for I doubt whether her pride will ever allow herto return to France."

　　"Still, baron," said Monte Cristo, "family griefs, or indeedany other affliction which would crush a man whose child washis only treasure, are endurable to a millionaire.Philosophers may well say, and practical men will alwayssupport the opinion, that money mitigates many trials; andif you admit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you oughtto be very easily consoled -- you, the king of finance, thefocus of immeasurable power."

　　Danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertainwhether he spoke seriously. "Yes," he answered, "if afortune brings consolation, I ought to be consoled; I amrich."

　　"So rich, dear sir, that your fortune resembles thepyramids; if you wished to demolish them you could not, andif it were possible, you would not dare!" Danglars smiled atthe good-natured pleasantry of the count. "That reminds me,"he said, "that when you entered I was on the point ofsigning five little bonds; I have already signed two: willyou allow me to do the same to the others?"

　　"Pray do so."

　　There was a moment's silence, during which the noise of thebanker's pen was alone heard, while Monte Cristo examinedthe gilt mouldings on the ceiling. "Are they Spanish,Haitian, or Neapolitan bonds?" said Monte Cristo. "No," saidDanglars, smiling, "they are bonds on the bank of France,payable to bearer. Stay, count," he added, "you, who may hecalled the emperor, if I claim the title of king of finance,have you many pieces of paper of this size, each worth amillion?" The count took into his hands the papers, whichDanglars had so proudly presented to him, and read: --

　　"To the Governor of the Bank. Please pay to my order, fromthe fund deposited by me, the sum of a million, and chargethe same to my account.

　　"Baron Danglars."

　　"One, two, three, four, five," said Monte Cristo; "fivemillions -- why what a Croesus you are!"

　　"This is how I transact business," said Danglars.

　　"It is really wonderful," said the count; "above all, if, asI suppose, it is payable at sight."

　　"It is, indeed, said Danglars.

　　"It is a fine thing to have such credit; really, it is onlyin France these things are done. Five millions on fivelittle scraps of paper! -- it must be seen to be believed."

　　"You do not doubt it?"

　　"No!"

　　"You say so with an accent -- stay, you shall be convinced;take my clerk to the bank, and you will see him leave itwith an order on the Treasury for the same sum."

　　"No," said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, "mostdecidedly not; the thing is so curious, I will make theexperiment myself. I am credited on you for six millions. Ihave drawn nine hundred thousand francs, you therefore stillowe me five millions and a hundred thousand francs. I willtake the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds, withyour signature alone, and here is a receipt in full for thesix millions between us. I had prepared it beforehand, for Iam much in want of money to-day." And Monte Cristo placedthe bonds in his pocket with one hand, while with the otherhe held out the receipt to Danglars. If a thunderbolt hadfallen at the banker's feet, he could not have experiencedgreater terror.

　　"What," he stammered, "do you mean to keep that money?Excuse me, excuse me, but I owe this money to the charityfund, -- a deposit which I promised to pay this morning."

　　"Oh, well, then," said Monte Cristo, "I am not particularabout these five notes, pay me in a different form; Iwished, from curiosity, to take these, that I might be ableto say that without any advice or preparation the house ofDanglars had paid me five millions without a minute's delay;it would have been remarkable. But here are your bonds; payme differently;" and he held the bonds towards Danglars, whoseized them like a vulture extending its claws to withholdthe food that is being wrested from its grasp. Suddenly herallied, made a violent effort to restrain himself, and thena smile gradually widened the features of his disturbedcountenance.

　　"Certainly," he said, "your receipt is money."

　　"Oh dear, yes; and if you were at Rome, the house of Thomson& French would make no more difficulty about paying themoney on my receipt than you have just done."

　　"Pardon me, count, pardon me."

　　"Then I may keep this money?"

　　"Yes," said Danglars, while the perspiration started fromthe roots of his hair. "Yes, keep it -- keep it."

　　Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with thatindescribable expression which seemed to say, "Come,reflect; if you repent there is till time."

　　"No," said Danglars, "no, decidedly no; keep my signatures.But you know none are so formal as bankers in transactingbusiness; I intended this money for the charity fund, and Iseemed to be robbing them if I did not pay them with theseprecise bonds. How absurd -- as if one crown were not asgood as another. Excuse me;" and he began to laugh loudly,but nervously.

　　"Certainly, I excuse you," said Monte Cristo graciously,"and pocket them." And he placed the bonds in hispocket-book.

　　"But," said Danglars, "there is still a sum of one hundredthousand francs?"

　　"Oh, a mere nothing," said Monte Cristo. "The balance wouldcome to about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits."

　　"Count." said Danglars, "are you speaking seriously?"

　　"I never joke with bankers," said Monte Cristo in a freezingmanner, which repelled impertinence; and he turned to thedoor, just as the valet de chambre announced, -- "M. deBoville, receiver-general of the charities."

　　"Ma foi," said Monte Cristo; "I think I arrived just in timeto obtain your signatures, or they would have been disputedwith me."

　　Danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct thecount out. Monte Cristo exchanged a ceremonious bow with M.de Boville, who was standing in the waiting-room, and whowas introduced into Danglars' room as soon as the count hadleft. The count's sad face was illumined by a faint smile,as he noticed the portfolio which the receiver-general heldin his hand. At the door he found his carriage, and wasimmediately driven to the bank. Meanwhile Danglars,repressing all emotion, advanced to meet thereceiver-general. We need not say that a smile ofcondescension was stamped upon his lips. "Good-morning,creditor," said he; "for I wager anything it is the creditorwho visits me."

　　"You are right, baron," answered M. de Boville; "thecharities present themselves to you through me: the widowsand orphans depute me to receive alms to the amount of fivemillions from you."

　　"And yet they say orphans are to be pitied," said Danglars,wishing to prolong the jest. "Poor things!"

　　"Here I am in their name," said M. de Boville; "but did youreceive my letter yesterday?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I have brought my receipt."

　　"My dear M. de Boville, your widows and orphans must obligeme by waiting twenty-four hours, since M. de Monte Cristowhom you just saw leaving here -- you did see him, I think?"

　　"Yes; well?"

　　"Well, M. de Monte Cristo has just carried off their fivemillions."

　　"How so?"

　　"The count has an unlimited credit upon me; a credit openedby Thomson & French, of Rome; he came to demand fivemillions at once, which I paid him with checks on the bank.My funds are deposited there, and you can understand that ifI draw out ten millions on the same day it will appearrather strange to the governor. Two days will be a differentthing," said Danglars, smiling.

　　"Come," said Boville, with a tone of entire incredulity,"five millions to that gentleman who just left, and whobowed to me as though he knew me?"

　　"Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. deMonte Cristo knows everybody."

　　"Five millions!"

　　"Here is his receipt. Believe your own eyes." M. de Bovilletook the paper Danglars presented him, and read: --

　　"Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million onehundred thousand francs, to be repaid on demand by the houseof Thomson & French of Rome."

　　"It is really true," said M. de Boville.

　　"Do you know the house of Thomson & French?"

　　"Yes, I once had business to transact with it to the amountof 200,000 francs; but since then I have not heard itmentioned."

　　"It is one of the best houses in Europe," said Danglars,carelessly throwing down the receipt on his desk.

　　"And he had five millions in your hands alone! Why, thisCount of Monte Cristo must be a nabob?"

　　"Indeed I do not know what he is; he has three unlimitedcredits -- one on me, one on Rothschild, one on Lafitte;and, you see," he added carelessly, "he has given me thepreference, by leaving a balance of 100,000 francs." M. deBoville manifested signs of extraordinary admiration. "Imust visit him," he said, "and obtain some pious grant fromhim."

　　"Oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount to20,000 francs a month."

　　"It is magnificent! I will set before him the example ofMadame de Morcerf and her son."

　　"What example?"

　　"They gave all their fortune to the hospitals."

　　"What fortune?"

　　"Their own -- M. de Morcerf's, who is deceased."

　　"For what reason?"

　　"Because they would not spend money so guiltily acquired."

　　"And what are they to live upon?"

　　"The mother retires into the country, and the son enters thearmy."

　　"Well, I must confess, these are scruples."

　　"I registered their deed of gift yesterday."

　　"And how much did they possess?"

　　"Oh, not much -- from twelve to thirteen hundred thousandfrancs. But to return to our millions."

　　"Certainly," said Danglars, in the most natural tone in theworld. "Are you then pressed for this money?"

　　"Yes; for the examination of our cash takes placeto-morrow."

　　"To-morrow? Why did you not tell me so before? Why, it is asgood as a century! At what hour does the examination takeplace?"

　　"At two o'clock."

　　"Send at twelve," said Danglars, smiling. M. de Boville saidnothing, but nodded his head, and took up the portfolio."Now I think of it, you can do better," said Danglars.

　　"How do you mean?"

　　"The receipt of M. de Monte Cristo is as good as money; takeit to Rothschild's or Lafitte's, and they will take it offyour hands at once."

　　"What, though payable at Rome?"

　　"Certainly; it will only cost you a discount of 5,000 or6,000 francs." The receiver started back. "Ma foi," he said,"I prefer waiting till to-morrow. What a proposition!"

　　"I thought, perhaps," said Danglars with supremeimpertinence, "that you had a deficiency to make up?"

　　"Indeed," said the receiver.

　　"And if that were the case it would be worth while to makesome sacrifice."

　　"Thank you, no, sir "

　　"Then it will be to-morrow."

　　"Yes; but without fail."

　　"Ah, you are laughing at me; send to-morrow at twelve, andthe bank shall be notified."

　　"I will come myself."

　　"Better still, since it will afford me the pleasure ofseeing you." They shook hands. "By the way," said M. deBoville, "are you not going to the funeral of poorMademoiselle de Villefort, which I met on my road here?"

　　"No," said the banker; "I have appeared rather ridiculoussince that affair of Benedetto, so I remain in thebackground."

　　"Bah, you are wrong. How were you to blame in that affair?"

　　"Listen -- when one bears an irreproachable name, as I do,one is rather sensitive."

　　"Everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, MademoiselleDanglars!"

　　"Poor Eugenie!" said Danglars; "do you know she is going toembrace a religious life?"

　　"No."

　　"Alas, it is unhappily but too true. The day after theevent, she decided on leaving Paris with a nun of heracquaintance; they are gone to seek a very strict convent inItaly or Spain."

　　"Oh, it is terrible!" and M. de Boville retired with thisexclamation, after expressing acute sympathy with thefather. But he had scarcely left before Danglars, with anenergy of action those can alone understand who have seenRobert Macaire represented by Frederic,* exclaimed, --"Fool!" Then enclosing Monte Cristo's receipt in a littlepocket-book, he added: -- "Yes, come at twelve o'clock; Ishall then be far away." Then he double-locked his door,emptied all his drawers, collected about fifty thousandfrancs in bank-notes, burned several papers, left othersexposed to view, and then commenced writing a letter whichhe addressed:

　　"To Madame la Baronne Danglars."

　　* Frederic Lemaitre -- French actor (1800-1876). RobertMacaire is the hero of two favorite melodramas -- "Chien deMontargis" and "Chien d'Aubry" -- and the name is applied tobold criminals as a term of derision.

　　"I will place it on her table myself to-night," he murmured.Then taking a passport from his drawer he said, -- "Good, itis available for two months longer."

　　Chapter 105The Cemetery of Pere-la-Chaise.

　　M. de Boville had indeed met the funeral procession whichwas taking Valentine to her last home on earth. The weatherwas dull and stormy, a cold wind shook the few remainingyellow leaves from the boughs of the trees, and scatteredthem among the crowd which filled the boulevards. M. deVillefort, a true Parisian, considered the cemetery ofPere-la-Chaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remainsof a Parisian family; there alone the corpses belonging tohim would be surrounded by worthy associates. He hadtherefore purchased a vault, which was quickly occupied bymembers of his family. On the front of the monument wasinscribed: "The families of Saint-Meran and Villefort," forsuch had been the last wish expressed by poor Renee,Valentine's mother. The pompous procession therefore wendedits way towards Pere-la-Chaise from the FaubourgSaint-Honore. Having crossed Paris, it passed through theFaubourg du Temple, then leaving the exterior boulevards, itreached the cemetery. More than fifty private carriagesfollowed the twenty mourning-coaches, and behind them morethan five hundred persons joined in the procession on foot.

　　These last consisted of all the young people whomValentine's death had struck like a thunderbolt, and who,notwithstanding the raw chilliness of the season, could notrefrain from paying a last tribute to the memory of thebeautiful, chaste, and adorable girl, thus cut off in theflower of her youth. As they left Paris, an equipage withfour horses, at full speed, was seen to draw up suddenly; itcontained Monte Cristo. The count left the carriage andmingled in the crowd who followed on foot. Chateau-Renaudperceived him and immediately alighting from his coupe,joined him.

　　The count looked attentively through every opening in thecrowd; he was evidently watching for some one, but hissearch ended in disappointment. "Where is Morrel?" he asked;"do either of these gentlemen know where he is?"

　　"We have already asked that question," said Chateau-Renaud,"for none of us has seen him." The count was silent, butcontinued to gaze around him. At length they arrived at thecemetery. The piercing eye of Monte Cristo glanced throughclusters of bushes and trees, and was soon relieved from allanxiety, for seeing a shadow glide between the yew-trees,Monte Cristo recognized him whom he sought. One funeral isgenerally very much like another in this magnificentmetropolis. Black figures are seen scattered over the longwhite avenues; the silence of earth and heaven is alonebroken by the noise made by the crackling branches of hedgesplanted around the monuments; then follows the melancholychant of the priests, mingled now and then with a sob ofanguish, escaping from some woman concealed behind a mass offlowers.

　　The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly behindthe tomb of Abelard and Heloise, placed itself close to theheads of the horses belonging to the hearse, and followingthe undertaker's men, arrived with them at the spotappointed for the burial. Each person's attention wasoccupied. Monte Cristo saw nothing but the shadow, which noone else observed. Twice the count left the ranks to seewhether the object of his interest had any concealed weaponbeneath his clothes. When the procession stopped, thisshadow was recognized as Morrel, who, with his coat buttonedup to his throat, his face livid, and convulsively crushinghis hat between his fingers, leaned against a tree, situatedon an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none ofthe funeral details could escape his observation. Everythingwas conducted in the usual manner. A few men, the leastimpressed of all by the scene, pronounced a discourse, somedeploring this premature death, others expatiating on thegrief of the father, and one very ingenious person quotingthe fact that Valentine had solicited pardon of her fatherfor criminals on whom the arm of justice was ready to fall-- until at length they exhausted their stores of metaphorand mournful speeches.

　　Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only sawMorrel, whose calmness had a frightful effect on those whoknew what was passing in his heart. "See," said Beauchamp,pointing out Morrel to Debray. "What is he doing up there?"And they called Chateau-Renaud's attention to him.

　　"How pale he is!" said Chateau-Renaud, shuddering.

　　"He is cold," said Debray.

　　"Not at all," said Chateau-Renaud, slowly; "I think he isviolently agitated. He is very susceptible."

　　"Bah," said Debray; "he scarcely knew Mademoiselle deVillefort; you said so yourself."

　　"True. Still I remember he danced three times with her atMadame de Morcerf's. Do you recollect that ball, count,where you produced such an effect?"

　　"No, I do not," replied Monte Cristo, without even knowingof what or to whom he was speaking, so much was he occupiedin watching Morrel, who was holding his breath with emotion."The discourse is over; farewell, gentlemen," said thecount. And he disappeared without anyone seeing whither hewent. The funeral being over, the guests returned to Paris.Chateau-Renaud looked for a moment for Morrel; but whilethey were watching the departure of the count, Morrel hadquitted his post, and Chateau-Renaud, failing in his search,joined Debray and Beauchamp.

　　Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb andawaited the arrival of Morrel, who by degrees approached thetomb now abandoned by spectators and workmen. Morrel threw aglance around, but before it reached the spot occupied byMonte Cristo the latter had advanced yet nearer, stillunperceived. The young man knelt down. The count, withoutstretched neck and glaring eyes, stood in an attitudeready to pounce upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrelbent his head till it touched the stone, then clutching thegrating with both hands, he murmured, -- "Oh, Valentine!"The count's heart was pierced by the utterance of these twowords; he stepped forward, and touching the young man'sshoulder, said, -- "I was looking for you, my friend." MonteCristo expected a burst of passion, but he was deceived, forMorrel turning round, said calmly, --

　　"You see I was praying." The scrutinizing glance of thecount searched the young man from head to foot. He thenseemed more easy.

　　"Shall I drive you back to Paris?" he asked.

　　"No, thank you."

　　"Do you wish anything?"

　　"Leave me to pray." The count withdrew without opposition,but it was only to place himself in a situation where hecould watch every movement of Morrel, who at length arose,brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards Paris,without once looking back. He walked slowly down the Rue dela Roquette. The count, dismissing his carriage, followedhim about a hundred paces behind. Maximilian crossed thecanal and entered the Rue Meslay by the boulevards. Fiveminutes after the door had been closed on Morrel's entrance,it was again opened for the count. Julie was at the entranceof the garden, where she was attentively watching Penelon,who, entering with zeal into his profession of gardener, wasvery busy grafting some Bengal roses. "Ah, count," sheexclaimed, with the delight manifested by every member ofthe family whenever he visited the Rue Meslay.

　　"Maximilian has just returned, has he not, madame?" asked

　　the count.

　　"Yes, I think I saw him pass; but pray, call Emmanuel."

　　"Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian's roomthis instant," replied Monte Cristo, "I have something ofthe greatest importance to tell him."

　　"Go, then," she said with a charming smile, whichaccompanied him until he had disappeared. Monte Cristo soonran up the staircase conducting from the ground-floor toMaximilian's room; when he reached the landing he listenedattentively, but all was still. Like many old housesoccupied by a single family, the room door was panelled withglass; but it was locked, Maximilian was shut in, and it wasimpossible to see what was passing in the room, because ared curtain was drawn before the glass. The count's anxietywas manifested by a bright color which seldom appeared onthe face of that imperturbable man.

　　"What shall I do!" he uttered, and reflected for a moment;"shall I ring? No, the sound of a bell, announcing avisitor, will but accelerate the resolution of one inMaximilian's situation, and then the bell would be followedby a louder noise." Monte Cristo trembled from head to footand as if his determination had been taken with the rapidityof lightning, he struck one of the panes of glass with hiselbow; the glass was shivered to atoms, then withdrawing thecurtain he saw Morrel, who had been writing at his desk,bound from his seat at the noise of the broken window.

　　"I beg a thousand pardons," said the count, "there isnothing the matter, but I slipped down and broke one of yourpanes of glass with my elbow. Since it is opened, I willtake advantage of it to enter your room; do not disturbyourself -- do not disturb yourself!" And passing his handthrough the broken glass, the count opened the door. Morrel,evidently discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less withthe intention of receiving him than to exclude his entry."Ma foi," said Monte Cristo, rubbing his elbow, "it's allyour servant's fault; your stairs are so polished, it islike walking on glass."

　　"Are you hurt, sir?" coldly asked Morrel.

　　"I believe not. But what are you about there? You werewriting."

　　"I?"

　　"Your fingers are stained with ink."

　　"Ah, true, I was writing. I do sometimes, soldier though Iam."

　　Monte Cristo advanced into the room; Maximilian was obligedto let him pass, but he followed him. "You were writing?"said Monte Cristo with a searching look.

　　"I have already had the honor of telling you I was," saidMorrel.

　　The count looked around him. "Your pistols are beside yourdesk," said Monte Cristo, pointing with his finger to thepistols on the table.

　　"I am on the point of starting on a journey," replied Morreldisdainfully.

　　"My friend," exclaimed Monte Cristo in a tone of exquisitesweetness.

　　"Sir?"

　　"My friend, my dear Maximilian, do not make a hastyresolution, I entreat you."

　　"I make a hasty resolution?" said Morrel, shrugging hisshoulders; "is there anything extraordinary in a journey?"

　　"Maximilian," said the count, "let us both lay aside themask we have assumed. You no more deceive me with that falsecalmness than I impose upon you with my frivoloussolicitude. You can understand, can you not, that to haveacted as I have done, to have broken that glass, to haveintruded on the solitude of a friend -- you can understandthat, to have done all this, I must have been actuated byreal uneasiness, or rather by a terrible conviction. Morrel,you are going to destroy yourself!"

　　"Indeed, count," said Morrel, shuddering; "what has put thisinto your head?"

　　"I tell you that you are about to destroy yourself,"continued the count, "and here is proof of what I say;" and,approaching the desk, he removed the sheet of paper whichMorrel had placed over the letter he had begun, and took thelatter in his hands.

　　Morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but Monte Cristoperceiving his intention, seized his wrist with his irongrasp. "You wish to destroy yourself," said the count; "youhave written it."

　　"Well," said Morrel, changing his expression of calmness forone of violence -- "well, and if I do intend to turn thispistol against myself, who shall prevent me -- who will dareprevent me? All my hopes are blighted, my heart is broken,my life a burden, everything around me is sad and mournful;earth has become distasteful to me, and human voicesdistract me. It is a mercy to let me die, for if I live Ishall lose my reason and become mad. When, sir, I tell youall this with tears of heartfelt anguish, can you reply thatI am wrong, can you prevent my putting an end to mymiserable existence? Tell me, sir, could you have thecourage to do so?"

　　"Yes, Morrel," said Monte Cristo, with a calmness whichcontrasted strangely with the young man's excitement; "yes,I would do so."

　　"You?" exclaimed Morrel, with increasing anger and reproach-- "you, who have deceived me with false hopes, who havecheered and soothed me with vain promises, when I might, ifnot have saved her, at least have seen her die in my arms!You, who pretend to understand everything, even the hiddensources of knowledge, -- and who enact the part of aguardian angel upon earth, and could not even find anantidote to a poison administered to a young girl! Ah, sir,indeed you would inspire me with pity, were you not hatefulin my eyes."

　　"Morrel" --

　　"Yes; you tell me to lay aside the mask, and I will do so,be satisfied! When you spoke to me at the cemetery, Ianswered you -- my heart was softened; when you arrivedhere, I allowed you to enter. But since you abuse myconfidence, since you have devised a new torture after Ithought I had exhausted them all, then, Count of MonteCristo my pretended benefactor -- then, Count of MonteCristo, the universal guardian, be satisfied, you shallwitness the death of your friend;" and Morrel, with amaniacal laugh, again rushed towards the pistols.

　　"And I again repeat, you shall not commit suicide."

　　"Prevent me, then!" replied Morrel, with another struggle,which, like the first, failed in releasing him from thecount's iron grasp.

　　"I will prevent you."

　　"And who are you, then, that arrogate to yourself thistyrannical right over free and rational beings?"

　　"Who am I?" repeated Monte Cristo. "Listen; I am the onlyman in the world having the right to say to you, `Morrel,your father's son shall not die to-day;'" and Monte Cristo,with an expression of majesty and sublimity, advanced witharms folded toward the young man, who, involuntarilyovercome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled astep.

　　"Why do you mention my father?" stammered he; "why do youmingle a recollection of him with the affairs of today?"

　　"Because I am he who saved your father's life when he wishedto destroy himself, as you do to-day -- because I am the manwho sent the purse to your young sister, and the Pharaon toold Morrel -- because I am the Edmond Dantes who nursed you,a child, on my knees." Morrel made another step back,staggering, breathless, crushed; then all his strength giveway, and he fell prostrate at the feet of Monte Cristo. Thenhis admirable nature underwent a complete and suddenrevulsion; he arose, rushed out of the room and to thestairs, exclaiming energetically, "Julie, Julie -- Emmanuel,Emmanuel!"

　　Monte Cristo endeavored also to leave, but Maximilian wouldhave died rather than relax his hold of the handle of thedoor, which he closed upon the count. Julie, Emmanuel, andsome of the servants, ran up in alarm on hearing the criesof Maximilian. Morrel seized their hands, and opening thedoor exclaimed in a voice choked with sobs, "On your knees-- on your knees -- he is our benefactor -- the saviour ofour father! He is" --

　　He would have added "Edmond Dantes," but the count seizedhis arm and prevented him. Julie threw herself into the armsof the count; Emmanuel embraced him as a guardian angel;Morrel again fell on his knees, and struck the ground withhis forehead. Then the iron-hearted man felt his heart swellin his breast; a flame seemed to rush from his throat to hiseyes, he bent his head and wept. For a while nothing washeard in the room but a succession of sobs, while theincense from their grateful hearts mounted to heaven. Juliehad scarcely recovered from her deep emotion when she rushedout of the room, descended to the next floor, ran into thedrawing-room with childlike joy and raised the crystal globewhich covered the purse given by the unknown of the Alleesde Meillan. Meanwhile, Emmanuel in a broken voice said tothe count, "Oh, count, how could you, hearing us so oftenspeak of our unknown benefactor, seeing us pay such homageof gratitude and adoration to his memory, -- how could youcontinue so long without discovering yourself to us? Oh, itwas cruel to us, and -- dare I say it? -- to you also."

　　"Listen, my friends," said the count -- "I may call you sosince we have really been friends for the last eleven years-- the discovery of this secret has been occasioned by agreat event which you must never know. I wish to bury itduring my whole life in my own bosom, but your brotherMaximilian wrested it from me by a violence he repents ofnow, I am sure." Then turning around, and seeing thatMorrel, still on his knees, had thrown himself into anarm-chair, be added in a low voice, pressing Emmanuel's handsignificantly, "Watch over him."

　　"Why so?" asked the young man, surprised.

　　"I cannot explain myself; but watch over him." Emmanuellooked around the room and caught sight of the pistols; hiseyes rested on the weapons, and he pointed to them. MonteCristo bent his head. Emmanuel went towards the pistols."Leave them," said Monte Cristo. Then walking towardsMorrel, he took his hand; the tumultuous agitation of theyoung man was succeeded by a profound stupor. Juliereturned, holding the silken purse in her hands, while tearsof joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.

　　"Here is the relic," she said; "do not think it will be lessdear to us now we are acquainted with our benefactor!"

　　"My child," said Monte Cristo, coloring, "allow me to takeback that purse? Since you now know my face, I wish to beremembered alone through the affection I hope you will grantme.

　　"Oh," said Julie, pressing the purse to her heart, "no, no,I beseech you do not take it, for some unhappy day you willleave us, will you not?"

　　"You have guessed rightly, madame," replied Monte Cristo,smiling; "in a week I shall have left this country, where somany persons who merit the vengeance of heaven livedhappily, while my father perished of hunger and grief."While announcing his departure, the count fixed his eyes onMorrel, and remarked that the words, "I shall have left thiscountry," had failed to rouse him from his lethargy. He thensaw that he must make another struggle against the grief ofhis friend, and taking the hands of Emmanuel and Julie,which he pressed within his own, he said with the mildauthority of a father, "My kind friends, leave me alone withMaximilian." Julie saw the means offered of carrying off herprecious relic, which Monte Cristo had forgotten. She drewher husband to the door. "Let us leave them," she said. Thecount was alone with Morrel, who remained motionless as astatue.

　　"Come," said Monte-Cristo, touching his shoulder with hisfinger, "are you a man again, Maximilian?"

　　"Yes; for I begin to suffer again."

　　The count frowned, apparently in gloomy hesitation.

　　"Maximilian, Maximilian," he said, "the ideas you yield toare unworthy of a Christian."

　　"Oh, do not fear, my friend," said Morrel, raising his head,and smiling with a sweet expression on the count; "I shallno longer attempt my life."

　　"Then we are to have no more pistols -- no more despair?"

　　"No; I have found a better remedy for my grief than either abullet or a knife."

　　"Poor fellow, what is it?"

　　"My grief will kill me of itself."

　　"My friend," said Monte Cristo, with an expression ofmelancholy equal to his own, "listen to me. One day, in amoment of despair like yours, since it led to a similarresolution, I also wished to kill myself; one day yourfather, equally desperate, wished to kill himself too. Ifany one had said to your father, at the moment he raised thepistol to his head -- if any one had told me, when in myprison I pushed back the food I had not tasted for threedays -- if anyone had said to either of us then, `Live --the day will come when you will be happy, and will blesslife!' -- no matter whose voice had spoken, we should haveheard him with the smile of doubt, or the anguish ofincredulity, -- and yet how many times has your fatherblessed life while embracing you -- how often have I myself"--

　　"Ah," exclaimed Morrel, interrupting the count, "you hadonly lost your liberty, my father had only lost his fortune,but I have lost Valentine."

　　"Look at me," said Monte Cristo, with that expression whichsometimes made him so eloquent and persuasive -- "look atme. There are no tears in my eyes, nor is there fever in myveins, yet I see you suffer -- you, Maximilian, whom I loveas my own son. Well, does not this tell you that in grief,as in life, there is always something to look forward tobeyond? Now, if I entreat, if I order you to live, Morrel,it is in the conviction that one day you will thank me forhaving preserved your life."

　　"Oh, heavens," said the young man, "oh, heavens -- what areyou saying, count? Take care. But perhaps you have neverloved!"

　　"Child!" replied the count.

　　"I mean, as I love. You see, I have been a soldier eversince I attained manhood. I reached the age of twenty-ninewithout loving, for none of the feelings I before thenexperienced merit the apellation of love. Well, attwenty-nine I saw Valentine; for two years I have loved her,for two years I have seen written in her heart, as in abook, all the virtues of a daughter and wife. Count, topossess Valentine would have been a happiness too infinite,too ecstatic, too complete, too divine for this world, sinceit has been denied me; but without Valentine the earth isdesolate."

　　"I have told you to hope," said the count.

　　"Then have a care, I repeat, for you seek to persuade me,and if you succeed I should lose my reason, for I shouldhope that I could again behold Valentine." The count smiled."My friend, my father," said Morrel with excitement, "have acare, I again repeat, for the power you wield over me alarmsme. Weigh your words before you speak, for my eyes havealready become brighter, and my heart beats strongly; becautious, or you will make me believe in supernaturalagencies. I must obey you, though you bade me call forth thedead or walk upon the water."

　　"Hope, my friend," repeated the count.

　　"Ah," said Morrel, falling from the height of excitement tothe abyss of despair -- "ah, you are playing with me, likethose good, or rather selfish mothers who soothe theirchildren with honeyed words, because their screams annoythem. No, my friend, I was wrong to caution you; do notfear, I will bury my grief so deep in my heart, I willdisguise it so, that you shall not even care to sympathizewith me. Adieu, my friend, adieu!"

　　"On the contrary," said the count, "after this time you mustlive with me -- you must not leave me, and in a week weshall have left France behind us."

　　"And you still bid me hope?"

　　"I tell you to hope, because I have a method of curing you."

　　"Count, you render me sadder than before, if it be possible.You think the result of this blow has been to produce anordinary grief, and you would cure it by an ordinary remedy-- change of scene." And Morrel dropped his head withdisdainful incredulity. "What can I say more?" asked MonteCristo. "I have confidence in the remedy I propose, and onlyask you to permit me to assure you of its efficacy."

　　"Count, you prolong my agony."

　　"Then," said the count, "your feeble spirit will not evengrant me the trial I request? Come -- do you know of whatthe Count of Monte Cristo is capable? do you know that heholds terrestrial beings under his control? nay, that he canalmost work a miracle? Well, wait for the miracle I hope toaccomplish, or" --

　　"Or?" repeated Morrel.

　　"Or, take care, Morrel, lest I call you ungrateful."

　　"Have pity on me, count!"

　　"I feel so much pity towards you, Maximilian, that -- listento me attentively -- if I do not cure you in a month, to theday, to the very hour, mark my words, Morrel, I will placeloaded pistols before you, and a cup of the deadliestItalian poison -- a poison more sure and prompt than thatwhich has killed Valentine."

　　"Will you promise me?"

　　"Yes; for I am a man, and have suffered like yourself, andalso contemplated suicide; indeed, often since misfortunehas left me I have longed for the delights of an eternalsleep."

　　"But you are sure you will promise me this?" said Morrel,intoxicated. "I not only promise, but swear it!" said MonteCristo extending his hand.

　　"In a month, then, on your honor, if I am not consoled, youwill let me take my life into my own hands, and whatever mayhappen you will not call me ungrateful?"

　　"In a month, to the day, the very hour and the date aresacred, Maximilian. I do not know whether you remember thatthis is the 5th of September; it is ten years to-day since Isaved your father's life, who wished to die." Morrel seizedthe count's hand and kissed it; the count allowed him to paythe homage he felt due to him. "In a month you will find onthe table, at which we shall be then sitting, good pistolsand a delicious draught; but, on the other hand, you mustpromise me not to attempt your life before that time."

　　"Oh, I also swear it!" Monte Cristo drew the young mantowards him, and pressed him for some time to his heart."And now," he said, "after to-day, you will come and livewith me; you can occupy Haidee's apartment, and my daughterwill at least be replaced by my son."

　　"Haidee?" said Morrel, "what has become of her?"

　　"She departed last night."

　　"To leave you?"

　　"To wait for me. Hold yourself ready then to join me at theChamps Elysees, and lead me out of this house without anyone seeing my departure." Maximilian hung his head, andobeyed with childlike reverence.

　　Chapter 106Dividing the Proceeds.

　　The apartment on the second floor of the house in the RueSaint-Germain-des-Pres, where Albert de Morcerf had selecteda home for his mother, was let to a very mysterious person.This was a man whose face the concierge himself had neverseen, for in the winter his chin was buried in one of thelarge red handkerchiefs worn by gentlemen's coachmen on acold night, and in the summer he made a point of alwaysblowing his nose just as he approached the door. Contrary tocustom, this gentleman had not been watched, for as thereport ran that he was a person of high rank, and one whowould allow no impertinent interference, his incognito wasstrictly respected.

　　His visits were tolerably regular, though occasionally heappeared a little before or after his time, but generally,both in summer and winter, he took possession of hisapartment about four o'clock, though he never spent thenight there. At half-past three in the winter the fire waslighted by the discreet servant, who had the superintendenceof the little apartment, and in the summer ices were placedon the table at the same hour. At four o'clock, as we havealready stated, the mysterious personage arrived. Twentyminutes afterwards a carriage stopped at the house, a ladyalighted in a black or dark blue dress, and always thicklyveiled; she passed like a shadow through the lodge, and ranup-stairs without a sound escaping under the touch of herlight foot. No one ever asked her where she was going. Herface, therefore, like that of the gentleman, was perfectlyunknown to the two concierges, who were perhaps unequalledthroughout the capital for discretion. We need not say shestopped at the second floor. Then she tapped in a peculiarmanner at a door, which after being opened to admit her wasagain fastened, and curiosity penetrated no farther. Theyused the same precautions in leaving as in entering thehouse. The lady always left first, and as soon as she hadstepped into her carriage, it drove away, sometimes towardsthe right hand, sometimes to the left; then about twentyminutes afterwards the gentleman would also leave, buried inhis cravat or concealed by his handkerchief.

　　The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, themysterious lodger entered at ten o'clock in the morninginstead of four in the afternoon. Almost directlyafterwards, without the usual interval of time, a cabarrived, and the veiled lady ran hastily up-stairs. The dooropened, but before it could be closed, the lady exclaimed:"Oh, Lucien -- oh, my friend!" The concierge therefore heardfor the first time that the lodger's name was Lucien; still,as he was the very perfection of a door-keeper, he made uphis mind not to tell his wife. "Well, what is the matter, mydear?" asked the gentleman whose name the lady's agitationrevealed; "tell me what is the matter."

　　"Oh, Lucien, can I confide in you?"

　　"Of course, you know you can do so. But what can be thematter? Your note of this morning has completely bewilderedme. This precipitation -- this unusual appointment. Come,ease me of my anxiety, or else frighten me at once."

　　"Lucien, a great event has happened!" said the lady,glancing inquiringly at Lucien, -- "M. Danglars left lastnight!"

　　"Left? -- M. Danglars left? Where has he gone?"

　　"I do not know."

　　"What do you mean? Has he gone intending not to return?"

　　"Undoubtedly; -- at ten o'clock at night his horses took himto the barrier of Charenton; there a post-chaise was waitingfor him -- he entered it with his valet de chambre, sayingthat he was going to Fontainebleau."

　　"Then what did you mean" --

　　"Stay -- he left a letter for me."

　　"A letter?"

　　"Yes; read it." And the baroness took from her pocket aletter which she gave to Debray. Debray paused a momentbefore reading, as if trying to guess its contents, orperhaps while making up his mind how to act, whatever itmight contain. No doubt his ideas were arranged in a fewminutes, for he began reading the letter which caused somuch uneasiness in the heart of the baroness, and which ranas follows: --

　　"Madame and most faithful wife."

　　Debray mechanically stopped and looked at the baroness,whose face became covered with blushes. "Read," she said.

　　Debray continued: --

　　"When you receive this, you will no longer have a husband.Oh, you need not be alarmed, you will only have lost him asyou have lost your daughter; I mean that I shall betravelling on one of the thirty or forty roads leading outof France. I owe you some explanations for my conduct, andas you are a woman that can perfectly understand me, I willgive them. Listen, then. I received this morning fivemillions which I paid away; almost directly afterwardsanother demand for the same sum was presented to me; I putthis creditor off till to-morrow and I intend leavingto-day, to escape that to-morrow, which would be rather toounpleasant for me to endure. You understand this, do younot, my most precious wife? I say you understand this,because you are as conversant with my affairs as I am;indeed, I think you understand them better, since I amignorant of what has become of a considerable portion of myfortune, once very tolerable, while I am sure, madame, thatyou know perfectly well. For women have infallibleinstincts; they can even explain the marvellous by analgebraic calculation they have invented; but I, who onlyunderstand my own figures, know nothing more than that oneday these figures deceived me. Have you admired the rapidityof my fall? Have you been slightly dazzled at the suddenfusion of my ingots? I confess I have seen nothing but thefire; let us hope you have found some gold among the ashes.With this consoling idea, I leave you, madame, and mostprudent wife, without any conscientious reproach forabandoning you; you have friends left, and the ashes I havealready mentioned, and above all the liberty I hasten torestore to you. And here, madame, I must add another word ofexplanation. So long as I hoped you were working for thegood of our house and for the fortune of our daughter, Iphilosophically closed my eyes; but as you have transformedthat house into a vast ruin I will not be the foundation ofanother man's fortune. You were rich when I married you, butlittle respected. Excuse me for speaking so very candidly,but as this is intended only for ourselves, I do not see whyI should weigh my words. I have augmented our fortune, andit has continued to increase during the last fifteen years,till extraordinary and unexpected catastrophes have suddenlyoverturned it, -- without any fault of mine, I can honestlydeclare. You, madame, have only sought to increase your own,and I am convinced that you have succeeded. I leave you,therefore, as I took you, -- rich, but little respected.Adieu! I also intend from this time to work on my ownaccount. Accept my acknowledgments for the example you haveset me, and which I intend following.

　　"Your very devoted husband,

　　"Baron Danglars."

　　The baroness had watched Debray while he read this long andpainful letter, and saw him, notwithstanding hisself-control, change color once or twice. When he had endedthe perusal, he folded the letter and resumed his pensiveattitude. "Well?" asked Madame Danglars, with an anxietyeasy to be understood.

　　"Well, madame?" unhesitatingly repeated Debray.

　　"With what ideas does that letter inspire you?"

　　"Oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with theidea that M. Danglars has left suspiciously."

　　"Certainly; but is this all you have to say to me?"

　　"I do not understand you," said Debray with freezingcoldness.

　　"He is gone! Gone, never to return!"

　　"Oh, madame, do not think that!"

　　"I tell you he will never return. I know his character; heis inflexible in any resolutions formed for his owninterests. If he could have made any use of me, he wouldhave taken me with him; he leaves me in Paris, as ourseparation will conduce to his benefit; -- therefore he hasgone, and I am free forever," added Madame Danglars, in thesame supplicating tone. Debray, instead of answering,allowed her to remain in an attitude of nervous inquiry."Well?" she said at length, "do you not answer me?"

　　"I have but one question to ask you, -- what do you intendto do?"

　　"I was going to ask you," replied the baroness with abeating heart.

　　"Ah, then, you wish to ask advice of me?"

　　"Yes; I do wish to ask your advice," said Madame Danglarswith anxious expectation.

　　"Then if you wish to take my advice," said the young mancoldly, "I would recommend you to travel."

　　"To travel!" she murmured.

　　"Certainly; as M. Danglars says, you are rich, and perfectlyfree. In my opinion, a withdrawal from Paris is absolutelynecessary after the double catastrophe of MademoiselleDanglars' broken contract and M. Danglars' disappearance.The world will think you abandoned and poor, for the wife ofa bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up anappearance of opulence. You have only to remain in Paris forabout a fortnight, telling the world you are abandoned, andrelating the details of this desertion to your best friends,who will soon spread the report. Then you can quit yourhouse, leaving your jewels and giving up your jointure, andevery one's mouth will be filled with praises of yourdisinterestedness. They will know you are deserted, andthink you also poor, for I alone know your real financialposition, and am quite ready to give up my accounts as anhonest partner." The dread with which the pale andmotionless baroness listened to this, was equalled by thecalm indifference with which Debray had spoken. "Deserted?"she repeated; "ah, yes, I am, indeed, deserted! You areright, sir, and no one can doubt my position." These werethe only words that this proud and violently enamoured womancould utter in response to Debray.

　　"But then you are rich, -- very rich, indeed," continuedDebray, taking out some papers from his pocket-book, whichhe spread upon the table. Madame Danglars did not see them;she was engaged in stilling the beatings of her heart, andrestraining the tears which were ready to gush forth. Atlength a sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did notentirely master her agitation, she at least succeeded inpreventing the fall of a single tear. "Madame," said Debray,"it is nearly six months since we have been associated. Youfurnished a principal of 100,000 francs. Our partnershipbegan in the month of April. In May we commenced operations,and in the course of the month gained 450,000 francs. InJune the profit amounted to 900,000. In July we added1,700,000 francs, -- it was, you know, the month of theSpanish bonds. In August we lost 300,000 francs at thebeginning of the month, but on the 13th we made up for it,and we now find that our accounts, reckoning from the firstday of partnership up to yesterday, when I closed them,showed a capital of 2,400,000 francs, that is, 1,200,000 foreach of us. Now, madame," said Debray, delivering up hisaccounts in the methodical manner of a stockbroker, "thereare still 80,000 francs, the interest of this money, in myhands."

　　"But," said the baroness, "I thought you never put the moneyout to interest."

　　"Excuse me, madame," said Debray coldly, "I had yourpermission to do so, and I have made use of it. There are,then, 40,000 francs for your share, besides the 100,000 youfurnished me to begin with, making in all 1,340,000 francsfor your portion. Now, madame, I took the precaution ofdrawing out your money the day before yesterday; it is notlong ago, you see, and I was in continual expectation ofbeing called on to deliver up my accounts. There is yourmoney, -- half in bank-notes, the other half in checkspayable to bearer. I say there, for as I did not consider myhouse safe enough, or lawyers sufficiently discreet, and aslanded property carries evidence with it, and moreover sinceyou have no right to possess anything independent of yourhusband, I have kept this sum, now your whole fortune, in achest concealed under that closet, and for greater securityI myself concealed it there.

　　"Now, madame," continued Debray, first opening the closet,then the chest; -- "now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000francs each, resembling, as you see, a large book bound iniron; to this I add a certificate in the funds of 25,000francs; then, for the odd cash, making I think about 110,000francs, here is a check upon my banker, who, not being M.Danglars, will pay you the amount, you may rest assured."Madame Danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, andthe heap of bank-notes. This enormous fortune made no greatappearance on the table. Madame Danglars, with tearlesseyes, but with her breast heaving with concealed emotion,placed the bank-notes in her bag, put the certificate andcheck into her pocket-book, and then, standing pale andmute, awaited one kind word of consolation. But she waitedin vain.

　　"Now, madame," said Debray, "you have a splendid fortune, anincome of about 60,000 livres a year, which is enormous fora woman who cannot keep an establishment here for a year, atleast. You will be able to indulge all your fancies;besides, should you find your income insufficient, you can,for the sake of the past, madame, make use of mine; and I amready to offer you all I possess, on loan."

　　"Thank you, sir -- thank you," replied the baroness; "youforget that what you have just paid me is much more than apoor woman requires, who intends for some time, at least, toretire from the world."

　　Debray was, for a moment, surprised, but immediatelyrecovering himself, he bowed with an air which seemed tosay, "As you please, madame."

　　Madame Danglars had until then, perhaps, hoped forsomething; but when she saw the careless bow of Debray, andthe glance by which it was accompanied, together with hissignificant silence, she raised her head, and withoutpassion or violence or even hesitation, ran down-stairs,disdaining to address a last farewell to one who could thuspart from her. "Bah," said Debray, when she had left, "theseare fine projects! She will remain at home, read novels, andspeculate at cards, since she can no longer do so on theBourse." Then taking up his account book, he cancelled withthe greatest care all the entries of the amounts he had justpaid away. "I have 1,060,000 francs remaining," he said."What a pity Mademoiselle de Villefort is dead! She suitedme in every respect, and I would have married her." And hecalmly waited until the twenty minutes had elapsed afterMadame Danglars' departure before he left the house. Duringthis time he occupied himself in making figures, with hiswatch by his side.

　　Asmodeus -- that diabolical personage, who would have beencreated by every fertile imagination if Le Sage had notacquired the priority in his great masterpiece -- would haveenjoyed a singular spectacle, if he had lifted up the roofof the little house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-Pres, whileDebray was casting up his figures. Above the room in whichDebray had been dividing two millions and a half with MadameDanglars was another, inhabited by persons who have playedtoo prominent a part in the incidents we have related fortheir appearance not to create some interest. Mercedes andAlbert were in that room. Mercedes was much changed withinthe last few days; not that even in her days of fortune shehad ever dressed with the magnificent display which makes usno longer able to recognize a woman when she appears in aplain and simple attire; nor indeed, had she fallen intothat state of depression where it is impossible to concealthe garb of misery; no, the change in Mercedes was that hereye no longer sparkled, her lips no longer smiled, and therewas now a hesitation in uttering the words which formerlysprang so fluently from her ready wit.

　　It was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not awant of courage which rendered her poverty burdensome.Mercedes, although deposed from the exalted position she hadoccupied, lost in the sphere she had now chosen, like aperson passing from a room splendidly lighted into utterdarkness, appeared like a queen, fallen from her palace to ahovel, and who, reduced to strict necessity, could neitherbecome reconciled to the earthen vessels she was herselfforced to place upon the table, nor to the humble palletwhich had become her bed. The beautiful Catalane and noblecountess had lost both her proud glance and charming smile,because she saw nothing but misery around her; the wallswere hung with one of the gray papers which economicallandlords choose as not likely to show the dirt; the floorwas uncarpeted; the furniture attracted the attention to thepoor attempt at luxury; indeed, everything offended eyesaccustomed to refinement and elegance.

　　Madame de Morcerf had lived there since leaving her house;the continual silence of the spot oppressed her; still,seeing that Albert continually watched her countenance tojudge the state of her feelings, she constrained herself toassume a monotonous smile of the lips alone, which,contrasted with the sweet and beaming expression thatusually shone from her eyes, seemed like "moonlight on astatue," -- yielding light without warmth. Albert, too, wasill at ease; the remains of luxury prevented him fromsinking into his actual position. If he wished to go outwithout gloves, his hands appeared too white; if he wishedto walk through the town, his boots seemed too highlypolished. Yet these two noble and intelligent creatures,united by the indissoluble ties of maternal and filial love,had succeeded in tacitly understanding one another, andeconomizing their stores, and Albert had been able to tellhis mother without extorting a change of countenance, --"Mother, we have no more money."

　　Mercedes had never known misery; she had often, in heryouth, spoken of poverty, but between want and necessity,those synonymous words, there is a wide difference. Amongstthe Catalans, Mercedes wished for a thousand things, butstill she never really wanted any. So long as the nets weregood, they caught fish; and so long as they sold their fish,they were able to buy twine for new nets. And then, shut outfrom friendship, having but one affection, which could notbe mixed up with her ordinary pursuits, she thought ofherself -- of no one but herself. Upon the little she earnedshe lived as well as she could; now there were two to besupported, and nothing to live upon.

　　Winter approached. Mercedes had no fire in that cold andnaked room -- she, who was accustomed to stoves which heatedthe house from the hall to the boudoir; she had not even onelittle flower -- she whose apartment had been a conservatoryof costly exotics. But she had her son. Hitherto theexcitement of fulfilling a duty had sustained them.Excitement, like enthusiasm, sometimes renders usunconscious to the things of earth. But the excitement hadcalmed down, and they felt themselves obliged to descendfrom dreams to reality; after having exhausted the ideal,they found they must talk of the actual.

　　"Mother," exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars wasdescending the stairs, "let us reckon our riches, if youplease; I want capital to build my plans upon."

　　"Capital -- nothing!" replied Mercedes with a mournfulsmile.

　　"No, mother, -- capital 3,000 francs. And I have an idea ofour leading a delightful life upon this 3,000 francs."

　　"Child!" sighed Mercedes.

　　"Alas, dear mother," said the young man, "I have unhappilyspent too much of your money not to know the value of it.These 3,000 francs are enormous, and I intend building uponthis foundation a miraculous certainty for the future."

　　"You say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought toaccept these 3,000 francs?" said Mercedes, coloring.

　　"I think so," answered Albert in a firm tone. "We willaccept them the more readily, since we have them not here;you know they are buried in the garden of the little housein the Allees de Meillan, at Marseilles. With 200 francs wecan reach Marseilles."

　　"With 200 francs? -- are you sure, Albert?"

　　"Oh, as for that, I have made inquiries respecting thediligences and steamboats, and my calculations are made. Youwill take your place in the coupe to Chalons. You see,mother, I treat you handsomely for thirty-five francs."Albert then took a pen, and wrote: --

　　Frs.Coupe, thirty-five francs ............................ 35From Chalons to Lyons you will go on by the steamboat-- six francs ......................................... 6From Lyons to Avignon (still by steamboat),sixteen francs ....................................... 16From Avignon to Marseilles, seven franc................ 7Expenses on the road, about fifty francs ............. 50Total................................................ 114 frs.

　　"Let us put down 120," added Albert, smiling. "You see I amgenerous, am I not, mother?"

　　"But you, my poor child?"

　　"I? do you not see that I reserve eighty francs for myself?A young man does not require luxuries; besides, I know whattravelling is."

　　"With a post-chaise and valet de chambre?"

　　"Any way, mother."

　　"Well, be it so. But these 200 francs?"

　　"Here they are, and 200 more besides. See, I have sold mywatch for 100 francs, and the guard and seals for 300. Howfortunate that the ornaments were worth more than the watch.Still the same story of superfluities! Now I think we arerich, since instead of the 114 francs we require for thejourney we find ourselves in possession of 250."

　　"But we owe something in this house?"

　　"Thirty francs; but I pay that out of my 150 francs, -- thatis understood, -- and as I require only eighty francs for myjourney, you see I am overwhelmed with luxury. But that isnot all. What do you say to this, mother?"

　　And Albert took out of a little pocket-book with goldenclasps, a remnant of his old fancies, or perhaps a tendersouvenir from one of the mysterious and veiled ladies whoused to knock at his little door, -- Albert took out of thispocket-book a note of 1,000 francs.

　　"What is this?" asked Mercedes.

　　"A thousand francs."

　　"But whence have you obtained them?"

　　"Listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much toagitation." And Albert, rising, kissed his mother on bothcheeks, then stood looking at her. "You cannot imagine,mother, how beautiful I think you!" said the young man,impressed with a profound feeling of filial love. "You are,indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman I ever saw!"

　　"Dear child!" said Mercedes, endeavoring in vain to restraina tear which glistened in the corner of her eye. "Indeed,you only wanted misfortune to change my love for you toadmiration. I am not unhappy while I possess my son!"

　　"Ah, just so," said Albert; "here begins the trial. Do youknow the decision we have come to, mother?"

　　"Have we come to any?"

　　"Yes; it is decided that you are to live at Marseilles, andthat I am to leave for Africa, where I will earn for myselfthe right to use the name I now bear, instead of the one Ihave thrown aside." Mercedes sighed. "Well, mother, Iyesterday engaged myself as substitute in the Spahis,"*added the young man, lowering his eyes with a certainfeeling of shame, for even he was unconscious of thesublimity of his self-abasement. "I thought my body was myown, and that I might sell it. I yesterday took the place ofanother. I sold myself for more than I thought I was worth,"he added, attempting to smile; "I fetched 2,000 francs."

　　* The Spahis are French cavalry reserved for service inAfrica.

　　"Then these 1,000 francs" -- said Mercedes, shuddering --

　　"Are the half of the sum, mother; the other will be paid ina year."

　　Mercedes raised her eyes to heaven with an expression itwould be impossible to describe, and tears, which hadhitherto been restrained, now yielded to her emotion, andran down her cheeks.

　　"The price of his blood!" she murmured.

　　"Yes, if I am killed," said Albert, laughing. "But I assureyou, mother, I have a strong intention of defending myperson, and I never felt half so strong an inclination tolive as I do now."

　　"Merciful heavens!"

　　"Besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that I amto be killed? Has Lamoriciere, that Ney of the South, beenkilled? Has Changarnier been killed? Has Bedeau been killed?Has Morrel, whom we know, been killed? Think of your joy,mother, when you see me return with an embroidered uniform!I declare, I expect to look magnificent in it, and chosethat regiment only from vanity." Mercedes sighed whileendeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt that she oughtnot to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall uponher son. "Well, now you understand, mother!" continuedAlbert; "here are more than 4,000 francs settled on you;upon these you can live at least two years."

　　"Do you think so?" said Mercedes. These words were utteredin so mournful a tone that their real meaning did not escapeAlbert; he felt his heart beat, and taking his mother's handwithin his own he said, tenderly, --

　　"Yes, you will live!"

　　"I shall live! -- then you will not leave me, Albert?"

　　"Mother, I must go," said Albert in a firm, calm voice; "youlove me too well to wish me to remain useless and idle withyou; besides, I have signed."

　　"You will obey your own wish and the will of heaven!"

　　"Not my own wish, mother, but reason -- necessity. Are wenot two despairing creatures? What is life to you? --Nothing. What is life to me? -- Very little without you,mother; for believe me, but for you I should have ceased tolive on the day I doubted my father and renounced his name.Well, I will live, if you promise me still to hope; and ifyou grant me the care of your future prospects, you willredouble my strength. Then I will go to the governor ofAlgeria; he has a royal heart, and is essentially a soldier;I will tell him my gloomy story. I will beg him to turn hiseyes now and then towards me, and if he keep his word andinterest himself for me, in six months I shall be anofficer, or dead. If I am an officer, your fortune iscertain, for I shall have money enough for both, and,moreover, a name we shall both be proud of, since it will beour own. If I am killed -- well then mother, you can alsodie, and there will be an end of our misfortunes."

　　"It is well," replied Mercedes, with her eloquent glance;"you are right, my love; let us prove to those who arewatching our actions that we are worthy of compassion."

　　"But let us not yield to gloomy apprehensions," said theyoung man; "I assure you we are, or rather we shall be, veryhappy. You are a woman at once full of spirit andresignation; I have become simple in my tastes, and amwithout passion, I hope. Once in service, I shall be rich --once in M. Dantes' house, you will be at rest. Let usstrive, I beseech you, -- let us strive to be cheerful."

　　"Yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy,Albert."

　　"And so our division is made, mother," said the young man,affecting ease of mind. "We can now part; come, I shallengage your passage."

　　"And you, my dear boy?"

　　"I shall stay here for a few days longer; we must accustomourselves to parting. I want recommendations and someinformation relative to Africa. I will join you again atMarseilles."

　　"Well, be it so -- let us part," said Mercedes, foldingaround her shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, andwhich accidentally happened to be a valuable black cashmere.Albert gathered up his papers hastily, rang the bell to paythe thirty francs he owed to the landlord, and offering hisarm to his mother, they descended the stairs. Some one waswalking down before them, and this person, hearing therustling of a silk dress, turned around. "Debray!" mutteredAlbert.

　　"You, Morcerf?" replied the secretary, resting on thestairs. Curiosity had vanquished the desire of preservinghis incognito, and he was recognized. It was, indeed,strange in this unknown spot to find the young man whosemisfortunes had made so much noise in Paris.

　　"Morcerf!" repeated Debray. Then noticing in the dim lightthe still youthful and veiled figure of Madame de Morcerf:-- "Pardon me," he added with a smile, "I leave you,Albert." Albert understood his thoughts. "Mother," he said,turning towards Mercedes, "this is M. Debray, secretary ofthe minister for the interior, once a friend of mine."

　　"How once?" stammered Debray; "what do you mean?"

　　"I say so, M. Debray, because I have no friends now, and Iought not to have any. I thank you for having recognized me,sir." Debray stepped forward, and cordially pressed the handof his interlocutor. "Believe me, dear Albert," he said,with all the emotion he was capable of feeling, -- "believeme, I feel deeply for your misfortunes, and if in any way Ican serve you, I am yours."

　　"Thank you, sir," said Albert, smiling. "In the midst of ourmisfortunes, we are still rich enough not to requireassistance from any one. We are leaving Paris, and when ourjourney is paid, we shall have 5,000 francs left." The bloodmounted to the temples of Debray, who held a million in hispocket-book, and unimaginative as he was he could not helpreflecting that the same house had contained two women, oneof whom, justly dishonored, had left it poor with 1,500,000francs under her cloak, while the other, unjustly stricken,but sublime in her misfortune, was yet rich with a fewdeniers. This parallel disturbed his usual politeness, thephilosophy he witnessed appalled him, he muttered a fewwords of general civility and ran down-stairs.

　　That day the minister's clerks and the subordinates had agreat deal to put up with from his ill-humor. But that samenight, he found himself the possessor of a fine house,situated on the Boulevard de la Madeleine, and an income of50,000 livres. The next day, just as Debray was signing thedeed, that is about five o'clock in the afternoon, Madame deMorcerf, after having affectionately embraced her son,entered the coupe of the diligence, which closed upon her. Aman was hidden in Lafitte's banking-house, behind one of thelittle arched windows which are placed above each desk; hesaw Mercedes enter the diligence, and he also saw Albertwithdraw. Then he passed his hand across his forehead, whichwas clouded with doubt. "Alas," he exclaimed, "how can Irestore the happiness I have taken away from these poorinnocent creatures? God help me!"

　　Chapter 107The Lions' Den.

　　One division of La Force, in which the most dangerous anddesperate prisoners are confined, is called the court ofSaint-Bernard. The prisoners, in their expressive language,have named it the "Lions' Den," probably because thecaptives possess teeth which frequently gnaw the bars, andsometimes the keepers also. It is a prison within a prison;the walls are double the thickness of the rest. The gratingsare every day carefully examined by jailers, whose herculeanproportions and cold pitiless expression prove them to havebeen chosen to reign over their subjects for their superioractivity and intelligence. The court-yard of this quarter isenclosed by enormous walls, over which the sun glancesobliquely, when it deigns to penetrate into this gulf ofmoral and physical deformity. On this paved yard are to beseen, -- pacing to and fro from morning till night, pale,careworn, and haggard, like so many shadows, -- the men whomjustice holds beneath the steel she is sharpening. There,crouched against the side of the wall which attracts andretains the most heat, they may be seen sometimes talking toone another, but more frequently alone, watching the door,which sometimes opens to call forth one from the gloomyassemblage, or to throw in another outcast from society.

　　The court of Saint-Bernard has its own particular apartmentfor the reception of guests; it is a long rectangle, dividedby two upright gratings placed at a distance of three feetfrom one another to prevent a visitor from shaking handswith or passing anything to the prisoners. It is a wretched,damp, nay, even horrible spot, more especially when weconsider the agonizing conferences which have taken placebetween those iron bars. And yet, frightful though this spotmay be, it is looked upon as a kind of paradise by the menwhose days are numbered; it is so rare for them to leave theLions' Den for any other place than the barrierSaint-Jacques or the galleys!

　　In the court which we have attempted to describe, and fromwhich a damp vapor was rising, a young man with his hands inhis pockets, who had excited much curiosity among theinhabitants of the "Den," might be seen walking. The cut ofhis clothes would have made him pass for an elegant man, ifthose clothes had not been torn to shreds; still they didnot show signs of wear, and the fine cloth, beneath thecareful hands of the prisoner, soon recovered its gloss inthe parts which were still perfect, for the wearer tried hisbest to make it assume the appearance of a new coat. Hebestowed the same attention upon the cambric front of ashirt, which had considerably changed in color since hisentrance into the prison, and he polished his varnishedboots with the corner of a handkerchief embroidered withinitials surmounted by a coronet. Some of the inmates of the"Lions' Den" were watching the operations of the prisoner'stoilet with considerable interest. "See, the prince ispluming himself," said one of the thieves. "He's a finelooking fellow," said another; "if he had only a comb andhair-grease, he'd take the shine off the gentlemen in whitekids."

　　"His coat looks almost new, and his boots shine like anigger's face. It's pleasant to have such well-dressedcomrades; but didn't those gendarmes behave shameful? --must 'a been jealous, to tear such clothes!"

　　"He looks like a big-bug," said another; "dresses in finestyle. And, then, to be here so young! Oh, what larks!"Meanwhile the object of this hideous admiration approachedthe wicket, against which one of the keepers was leaning."Come, sir," he said, "lend me twenty francs; you will soonbe paid; you run no risks with me. Remember, I haverelations who possess more millions than you have deniers.Come, I beseech you, lend me twenty francs, so that I maybuy a dressing-gown; it is intolerable always to be in acoat and boots! And what a coat, sir, for a prince of theCavalcanti!" The keeper turned his back, and shrugged hisshoulders; he did not even laugh at what would have causedany one else to do so; he had heard so many utter the samethings, -- indeed, he heard nothing else.

　　"Come," said Andrea, "you are a man void of compassion; I'llhave you turned out." This made the keeper turn around, andhe burst into a loud laugh. The prisoners then approachedand formed a circle. "I tell you that with that wretchedsum," continued Andrea, "I could obtain a coat, and a roomin which to receive the illustrious visitor I am dailyexpecting."

　　"Of course -- of course," said the prisoners; -- "any onecan see he's a gentleman!"

　　"Well, then, lend him the twenty francs," said the keeper,leaning on the other shoulder; "surely you will not refuse acomrade!"

　　"I am no comrade of these people," said the young man,proudly, "you have no right to insult me thus."

　　The thieves looked at one another with low murmurs, and astorm gathered over the head of the aristocratic prisoner,raised less by his own words than by the manner of thekeeper. The latter, sure of quelling the tempest when thewaves became too violent, allowed them to rise to a certainpitch that he might be revenged on the importunate Andrea,and besides it would afford him some recreation during thelong day. The thieves had already approached Andrea, somescreaming, "La savate -- La savate!"* a cruel operation,which consists in cuffing a comrade who may have fallen intodisgrace, not with an old shoe, but with an iron-heeled one.Others proposed the "anguille," another kind of recreation,in which a handkerchief is filled with sand, pebbles, andtwo-sous pieces, when they have them, which the wretchesbeat like a flail over the head and shoulders of the unhappysufferer. "Let us horsewhip the fine gentleman!" saidothers.

　　* Savate: an old shoe.

　　But Andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolledhis tongue around his cheeks, and smacked his lips in amanner equivalent to a hundred words among the bandits whenforced to be silent. It was a Masonic sign Caderousse hadtaught him. He was immediately recognized as one of them;the handkerchief was thrown down, and the iron-heeled shoereplaced on the foot of the wretch to whom it belonged. Somevoices were heard to say that the gentleman was right; thathe intended to be civil, in his way, and that they would setthe example of liberty of conscience, -- and the mobretired. The keeper was so stupefied at this scene that hetook Andrea by the hands and began examining his person,attributing the sudden submission of the inmates of theLions' Den to something more substantial than merefascination. Andrea made no resistance, although heprotested against it. Suddenly a voice was heard at thewicket. "Benedetto!" exclaimed an inspector. The keeperrelaxed his hold. "I am called," said Andrea. "To thevisitors' room!" said the same voice.

　　"You see some one pays me a visit. Ah, my dear sir, you willsee whether a Cavalcanti is to be treated like a commonperson!" And Andrea, gliding through the court like a blackshadow, rushed out through the wicket, leaving his comrades,and even the keeper, lost in wonder. Certainly a call to thevisitors' room had scarcely astonished Andrea less thanthemselves, for the wily youth, instead of making use of hisprivilege of waiting to be claimed on his entry into LaForce, had maintained a rigid silence. "Everything," hesaid, "proves me to be under the protection of some powerfulperson, -- this sudden fortune, the facility with which Ihave overcome all obstacles, an unexpected family and anillustrious name awarded to me, gold showered down upon me,and the most splendid alliances about to be entered into. Anunhappy lapse of fortune and the absence of my protectorhave cast me down, certainly, but not forever. The handwhich has retreated for a while will be again stretchedforth to save me at the very moment when I shall thinkmyself sinking into the abyss. Why should I risk animprudent step? It might alienate my protector. He has twomeans of extricating me from this dilemma, -- the one by amysterious escape, managed through bribery; the other bybuying off my judges with gold. I will say and do nothinguntil I am convinced that he has quite abandoned me, andthen" --

　　Andrea had formed a plan which was tolerably clever. Theunfortunate youth was intrepid in the attack, and rude inthe defence. He had borne with the public prison, and withprivations of all sorts; still, by degrees nature, or rathercustom, had prevailed, and he suffered from being naked,dirty, and hungry. It was at this moment of discomfort thatthe inspector's voice called him to the visiting-room.Andrea felt his heart leap with joy. It was too soon for avisit from the examining magistrate, and too late for onefrom the director of the prison, or the doctor; it must,then, be the visitor he hoped for. Behind the grating of theroom into which Andrea had been led, he saw, while his eyesdilated with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of M.Bertuccio, who was also gazing with sad astonishment uponthe iron bars, the bolted doors, and the shadow which movedbehind the other grating.

　　"Ah," said Andrea, deeply affected.

　　"Good morning, Benedetto," said Bertuccio, with his deep,hollow voice.

　　"You -- you?" said the young man, looking fearfully aroundhim.

　　"Do you not recognize me, unhappy child?"

　　"Silence, -- be silent!" said Andrea, who knew the delicatesense of hearing possessed by the walls; "for heaven's sake,do not speak so loud!"

　　"You wish to speak with me alone, do you not?" saidBertuccio.

　　"Oh, yes."

　　"That is well." And Bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, signedto a keeper whom he saw through the window of the wicket.

　　"Read?" he said.

　　"What is that?" asked Andrea.

　　"An order to conduct you to a room, and to leave you thereto talk to me."

　　"Oh," cried Andrea, leaping with joy. Then he mentallyadded, -- "Still my unknown protector! I am not forgotten.They wish for secrecy, since we are to converse in a privateroom. I understand, Bertuccio has been sent by myprotector."

　　The keeper spoke for a moment with an official, then openedthe iron gates and conducted Andrea to a room on the firstfloor. The room was whitewashed, as is the custom inprisons, but it looked quite brilliant to a prisoner, thougha stove, a bed, a chair, and a table formed the whole of itssumptuous furniture. Bertuccio sat down upon the chair,Andrea threw himself upon the bed; the keeper retired.

　　"Now," said the steward, "what have you to tell me?"

　　"And you?" said Andrea.

　　"You speak first."

　　"Oh, no. You must have much to tell me, since you have cometo seek me."

　　"Well, be it so. You have continued your course of villany;you have robbed -- you have assassinated."

　　"Well, I should say! If you had me taken to a private roomonly to tell me this, you might have saved yourself thetrouble. I know all these things. But there are some withwhich, on the contrary, I am not acquainted. Let us talk ofthose, if you please. Who sent you?"

　　"Come, come, you are going on quickly, M. Benedetto!"

　　"Yes, and to the point. Let us dispense with useless words.Who sends you?"

　　"No one."

　　"How did you know I was in prison?"

　　"I recognized you, some time since, as the insolent dandywho so gracefully mounted his horse in the Champs Elysees."

　　"Oh, the Champs Elysees? Ah, yes; we burn, as they say atthe game of pincette. The Champs Elysees? Come, let us talka little about my father."

　　"Who, then, am I?"

　　"You, sir? -- you are my adopted father. But it was not you,I presume, who placed at my disposal 100,000 francs, which Ispent in four or five months; it was not you whomanufactured an Italian gentleman for my father; it was notyou who introduced me into the world, and had me invited toa certain dinner at Auteuil, which I fancy I am eating atthis moment, in company with the most distinguished peoplein Paris -- amongst the rest with a certain procureur, whoseacquaintance I did very wrong not to cultivate, for he wouldhave been very useful to me just now; -- it was not you, infact, who bailed me for one or two millions, when the fataldiscovery of my little secret took place. Come, speak, myworthy Corsican, speak!"

　　"What do you wish me to say?"

　　"I will help you. You were speaking of the Champs Elyseesjust now, worthy foster-father."

　　"Well?"

　　"Well, in the Champs Elysees there resides a very richgentleman."

　　"At whose house you robbed and murdered, did you not?"

　　"I believe I did."

　　"The Count of Monte Cristo?"

　　"'Tis you who have named him, as M. Racine says. Well, am Ito rush into his arms, and strain him to my heart, crying,`My father, my father!' like Monsieur Pixerecourt."*

　　"Do not let us jest," gravely replied Bertuccio, "and darenot to utter that name again as you have pronounced it."

　　* Guilbert de Pixerecourt, French dramatist (1775-1844).

　　"Bah," said Andrea, a little overcome, by the solemnity ofBertuccio's manner, "why not?"

　　"Because the person who bears it is too highly favored byheaven to be the father of such a wretch as you."

　　"Oh, these are fine words."

　　"And there will be fine doings, if you do not take care."

　　"Menaces -- I do not fear them. I will say" --

　　"Do you think you are engaged with a pygmy like yourself?"said Bertuccio, in so calm a tone, and with so steadfast alook, that Andrea was moved to the very soul. "Do you thinkyou have to do with galley-slaves, or novices in the world?Benedetto, you are fallen into terrible hands; they areready to open for you -- make use of them. Do not play withthe thunderbolt they have laid aside for a moment, but whichthey can take up again instantly, if you attempt tointercept their movements."

　　"My father -- I will know who my father is," said theobstinate youth; "I will perish if I must, but I will knowit. What does scandal signify to me? What possessions, whatreputation, what `pull,' as Beauchamp says, -- have I? Yougreat people always lose something by scandal,notwithstanding your millions. Come, who is my father?"

　　"I came to tell you."

　　"Ah," cried Benedetto, his eyes sparkling with joy. Justthen the door opened, and the jailer, addressing himself toBertuccio, said, -- "Excuse me, sir, but the examiningmagistrate is waiting for the prisoner."

　　"And so closes our interview," said Andrea to the worthysteward; "I wish the troublesome fellow were at the devil!"

　　"I will return to-morrow," said Bertuccio.

　　"Good! Gendarmes, I am at your service. Ah, sir, do leave afew crowns for me at the gate that I may have some things Iam in need of!"

　　"It shall be done," replied Bertuccio. Andrea extended hishand; Bertuccio kept his own in his pocket, and merelyjingled a few pieces of money. "That's what I mean," saidAndrea, endeavoring to smile, quite overcome by the strangetranquillity of Bertuccio. "Can I be deceived?" he murmured,as he stepped into the oblong and grated vehicle which theycall "the salad basket." "Never mind, we shall see!To-morrow, then!" he added, turning towards Bertuccio.

　　"To-morrow!" replied the steward.

　　Chapter 108The Judge.

　　We remember that the Abbe Busoni remained alone withNoirtier in the chamber of death, and that the old man andthe priest were the sole guardians of the young girl's body.Perhaps it was the Christian exhortations of the abbe,perhaps his kind charity, perhaps his persuasive words,which had restored the courage of Noirtier, for ever sincehe had conversed with the priest his violent despair hadyielded to a calm resignation which surprised all who knewhis excessive affection for Valentine. M. de Villefort hadnot seen his father since the morning of the death. Thewhole establishment had been changed; another valet wasengaged for himself, a new servant for Noirtier, two womenhad entered Madame de Villefort's service, -- in fact,everywhere, to the concierge and coachmen, new faces werepresented to the different masters of the house, thuswidening the division which had always existed between themembers of the same family.

　　The assizes, also, were about to begin, and Villefort, shutup in his room, exerted himself with feverish anxiety indrawing up the case against the murderer of Caderousse. Thisaffair, like all those in which the Count of Monte Cristohad interfered, caused a great sensation in Paris. Theproofs were certainly not convincing, since they rested upona few words written by an escaped galley-slave on hisdeath-bed, and who might have been actuated by hatred orrevenge in accusing his companion. But the mind of theprocureur was made up; he felt assured that Benedetto wasguilty, and he hoped by his skill in conducting thisaggravated case to flatter his self-love, which was aboutthe only vulnerable point left in his frozen heart.

　　The case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant laborof Villefort, who wished it to be the first on the list inthe coming assizes. He had been obliged to seclude himselfmore than ever, to evade the enormous number of applicationspresented to him for the purpose of obtaining tickets ofadmission to the court on the day of trial. And then soshort a time had elapsed since the death of poor Valentine,and the gloom which overshadowed the house was so recent,that no one wondered to see the father so absorbed in hisprofessional duties, which were the only means he had ofdissipating his grief.

　　Once only had Villefort seen his father; it was the dayafter that upon which Bertuccio had paid his second visit toBenedetto, when the latter was to learn his father's name.The magistrate, harassed and fatigued, had descended to thegarden of his house, and in a gloomy mood, similar to thatin which Tarquin lopped off the tallest poppies, he beganknocking off with his cane the long and dying branches ofthe rose-trees, which, placed along the avenue, seemed likethe spectres of the brilliant flowers which had bloomed inthe past season. More than once he had reached that part ofthe garden where the famous boarded gate stood overlookingthe deserted enclosure, always returning by the same path,to begin his walk again, at the same pace and with the samegesture, when he accidentally turned his eyes towards thehouse, whence he heard the noisy play of his son, who hadreturned from school to spend the Sunday and Monday with hismother. While doing so, he observed M. Noirtier at one ofthe open windows, where the old man had been placed that hemight enjoy the last rays of the sun which yet yielded someheat, and was now shining upon the dying flowers and redleaves of the creeper which twined around the balcony.

　　The eye of the old man was riveted upon a spot whichVillefort could scarcely distinguish. His glance was so fullof hate, of ferocity, and savage impatience, that Villefortturned out of the path he had been pursuing, to see uponwhat person this dark look was directed. Then he saw beneatha thick clump of linden-trees, which were nearly divested offoliage, Madame de Villefort sitting with a book in herhand, the perusal of which she frequently interrupted tosmile upon her son, or to throw back his elastic ball, whichhe obstinately threw from the drawing-room into the garden.Villefort became pale; he understood the old man's meaning.Noirtier continued to look at the same object, but suddenlyhis glance was transferred from the wife to the husband, andVillefort himself had to submit to the searchinginvestigation of eyes, which, while changing their directionand even their language, had lost none of their menacingexpression. Madame de Villefort, unconscious of the passionsthat exhausted their fire over her head, at that moment heldher son's ball, and was making signs to him to reclaim itwith a kiss. Edward begged for a long while, the maternalkiss probably not offering sufficient recompense for thetrouble he must take to obtain it; however at length hedecided, leaped out of the window into a cluster ofheliotropes and daisies, and ran to his mother, his foreheadstreaming with perspiration. Madame de Villefort wiped hisforehead, pressed her lips upon it, and sent him back withthe ball in one hand and some bonbons in the other.

　　Villefort, drawn by an irresistible attraction, like that ofthe bird to the serpent, walked towards the house. As heapproached it, Noirtier's gaze followed him, and his eyesappeared of such a fiery brightness that Villefort felt thempierce to the depths of his heart. In that earnest lookmight be read a deep reproach, as well as a terrible menace.Then Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as though to remindhis son of a forgotten oath. "It is well, sir," repliedVillefort from below, -- "it is well; have patience but oneday longer; what I have said I will do." Noirtier seemed tobe calmed by these words, and turned his eyes withindifference to the other side. Villefort violentlyunbuttoned his great-coat, which seemed to strangle him, andpassing his livid hand across his forehead, entered hisstudy.

　　The night was cold and still; the family had all retired torest but Villefort, who alone remained up, and worked tillfive o'clock in the morning, reviewing the lastinterrogatories made the night before by the examiningmagistrates, compiling the depositions of the witnesses, andputting the finishing stroke to the deed of accusation,which was one of the most energetic and best conceived ofany he had yet delivered.

　　The next day, Monday, was the first sitting of the assizes.The morning dawned dull and gloomy, and Villefort saw thedim gray light shine upon the lines he had traced in redink. The magistrate had slept for a short time while thelamp sent forth its final struggles; its flickerings awokehim, and he found his fingers as damp and purple as thoughthey had been dipped in blood. He opened the window; abright yellow streak crossed the sky, and seemed to dividein half the poplars, which stood out in black relief on thehorizon. In the clover-fields beyond the chestnut-trees, alark was mounting up to heaven, while pouring out her clearmorning song. The damps of the dew bathed the head ofVillefort, and refreshed his memory. "To-day," he said withan effort, -- "to-day the man who holds the blade of justicemust strike wherever there is guilt." Involuntarily his eyeswandered towards the window of Noirtier's room, where he hadseen him the preceding night. The curtain was drawn, and yetthe image of his father was so vivid to his mind that headdressed the closed window as though it had been open, andas if through the opening he had beheld the menacing oldman. "Yes," he murmured, -- "yes, be satisfied."

　　His head dropped upon his chest, and in this position hepaced his study; then he threw himself, dressed as he was,upon a sofa, less to sleep than to rest his limbs, crampedwith cold and study. By degrees every one awoke. Villefort,from his study, heard the successive noises which accompanythe life of a house, -- the opening and shutting of doors,the ringing of Madame de Villefort's bell, to summon thewaiting-maid, mingled with the first shouts of the child,who rose full of the enjoyment of his age. Villefort alsorang; his new valet brought him the papers, and with them acup of chocolate.

　　"What are you bringing me?" said he.

　　"A cup of chocolate."

　　"I did not ask for it. Who has paid me this attention?"

　　"My mistress, sir. She said you would have to speak a greatdeal in the murder case, and that you should take somethingto keep up your strength;" and the valet placed the cup onthe table nearest to the sofa, which was, like all the rest,covered with papers. The valet then left the room. Villefortlooked for an instant with a gloomy expression, then,suddenly, taking it up with a nervous motion, he swallowedits contents at one draught. It might have been thought thathe hoped the beverage would be mortal, and that he soughtfor death to deliver him from a duty which he would ratherdie than fulfil. He then rose, and paced his room with asmile it would have been terrible to witness. The chocolatewas inoffensive, for M. de Villefort felt no effects. Thebreakfast-hour arrived, but M. de Villefort was not attable. The valet re-entered.

　　"Madame de Villefort wishes to remind you, sir," he said,"that eleven o'clock has just struck, and that the trialcommences at twelve."

　　"Well," said Villefort, "what then?"

　　"Madame de Villefort is dressed; she is quite ready, andwishes to know if she is to accompany you, sir?"

　　"Where to?"

　　"To the Palais."

　　"What to do?"

　　"My mistress wishes much to be present at the trial."

　　"Ah," said Villefort, with a startling accent; "does shewish that?" -- The man drew back and said, "If you wish togo alone, sir, I will go and tell my mistress." Villefortremained silent for a moment, and dented his pale cheekswith his nails. "Tell your mistress," he at length answered,"that I wish to speak to her, and I beg she will wait for mein her own room."

　　"Yes, sir."

　　"Then come to dress and shave me."

　　"Directly, sir." The valet re-appeared almost instantly,and, having shaved his master, assisted him to dressentirely in black. When he had finished, he said, --

　　"My mistress said she should expect you, sir, as soon as youhad finished dressing."

　　"I am going to her." And Villefort, with his papers underhis arm and hat in hand, directed his steps toward theapartment of his wife. At the door he paused for a moment towipe his damp, pale brow. He then entered the room. Madamede Villefort was sitting on an ottoman and impatientlyturning over the leaves of some newspapers and pamphletswhich young Edward, by way of amusing himself, was tearingto pieces before his mother could finish reading them. Shewas dressed to go out, her bonnet was placed beside her on achair, and her gloves were on her hands.

　　"Ah, here you are, monsieur," she said in her naturally calmvoice; "but how pale you are! Have you been working allnight? Why did you not come down to breakfast? Well, willyou take me, or shall I take Edward?" Madame de Villeforthad multiplied her questions in order to gain one answer,but to all her inquiries M. de Villefort remained mute andcold as a statue. "Edward," said Villefort, fixing animperious glance on the child, "go and play in thedrawing-room, my dear; I wish to speak to your mamma."Madame de Villefort shuddered at the sight of that coldcountenance, that resolute tone, and the awfully strangepreliminaries. Edward raised his head, looked at his mother,and then, finding that she did not confirm the order, begancutting off the heads of his leaden soldiers.

　　"Edward," cried M. de Villefort, so harshly that the childstarted up from the floor, "do you hear me? -- Go!" Thechild, unaccustomed to such treatment, arose, pale andtrembling; it would be difficult to say whether his emotionwere caused by fear or passion. His father went up to him,took him in his arms, and kissed his forehead. "Go," hesaid: "go, my child." Edward ran out. M. de Villefort wentto the door, which he closed behind the child, and bolted."Dear me!" said the young woman, endeavoring to read herhusband's inmost thoughts, while a smile passed over hercountenance which froze the impassibility of Villefort;"what is the matter?"

　　"Madame, where do you keep the poison you generally use?"said the magistrate, without any introduction, placinghimself between his wife and the door.

　　Madame de Villefort must have experienced something of thesensation of a bird which, looking up, sees the murderoustrap closing over its head. A hoarse, broken tone, which wasneither a cry nor a sigh, escaped from her, while she becamedeadly pale. "Monsieur," she said, "I -- I do not understandyou." And, in her first paroxysm of terror, she had raisedherself from the sofa, in the next, stronger very likelythan the other, she fell down again on the cushions. "Iasked you," continued Villefort, in a perfectly calm tone,"where you conceal the poison by the aid of which you havekilled my father-in-law, M. de Saint-Meran, mymother-in-law, Madame de Saint-Meran, Barrois, and mydaughter Valentine."

　　"Ah, sir," exclaimed Madame de Villefort, clasping herhands, "what do you say?"

　　"It is not for you to interrogate, but to answer."

　　"Is it to the judge or to the husband?" stammered Madame deVillefort. "To the judge -- to the judge, madame!" It wasterrible to behold the frightful pallor of that woman, theanguish of her look, the trembling of her whole frame. "Ah,sir," she muttered, "ah, sir," and this was all.

　　"You do not answer, madame!" exclaimed the terribleinterrogator. Then he added, with a smile yet more terriblethan his anger, "It is true, then; you do not deny it!" Shemoved forward. "And you cannot deny it!" added Villefort,extending his hand toward her, as though to seize her in thename of justice. "You have accomplished these differentcrimes with impudent address, but which could only deceivethose whose affections for you blinded them. Since the deathof Madame de Saint-Meran, I have known that a poisoner livedin my house. M. d'Avrigny warned me of it. After the deathof Barrois my suspicions were directed towards an angel, --those suspicions which, even when there is no crime, arealways alive in my heart; but after the death of Valentine,there has been no doubt in my mind, madame, and not only inmine, but in those of others; thus your crime, known by twopersons, suspected by many, will soon become public, and, asI told you just now, you no longer speak to the husband, butto the judge."

　　The young woman hid her face in her hands. "Oh, sir," shestammered, "I beseech you, do not believe appearances."

　　"Are you, then, a coward?" cried Villefort, in acontemptuous voice. "But I have always observed thatpoisoners were cowards. Can you be a coward, -- you who havehad the courage to witness the death of two old men and ayoung girl murdered by you?"

　　"Sir! sir!"

　　"Can you be a coward?" continued Villefort, with increasingexcitement, "you, who could count, one by one, the minutesof four death agonies? You, who have arranged your infernalplans, and removed the beverages with a talent and precisionalmost miraculous? Have you, then, who have calculatedeverything with such nicety, have you forgotten to calculateone thing -- I mean where the revelation of your crimes willlead you to? Oh, it is impossible -- you must have savedsome surer, more subtle and deadly poison than any other,that you might escape the punishment that you deserve. Youhave done this -- I hope so, at least." Madame de Villefortstretched out her hands, and fell on her knees.

　　"I understand," he said, "you confess; but a confession madeto the judges, a confession made at the last moment,extorted when the crime cannot be denied, diminishes not thepunishment inflicted on the guilty!"

　　"The punishment?" exclaimed Madame de Villefort, "thepunishment, monsieur? Twice you have pronounced that word!"

　　"Certainly. Did you hope to escape it because you were fourtimes guilty? Did you think the punishment would be withheldbecause you are the wife of him who pronounces it? -- No,madame, no; the scaffold awaits the poisoner, whoever shemay be, unless, as I just said, the poisoner has taken theprecaution of keeping for herself a few drops of herdeadliest potion." Madame de Villefort uttered a wild cry,and a hideous and uncontrollable terror spread over herdistorted features. "Oh, do not fear the scaffold, madame,"said the magistrate; "I will not dishonor you, since thatwould be dishonor to myself; no, if you have heard medistinctly, you will understand that you are not to die onthe scaffold."

　　"No, I do not understand; what do you mean?" stammered theunhappy woman, completely overwhelmed. "I mean that the wifeof the first magistrate in the capital shall not, by herinfamy, soil an unblemished name; that she shall not, withone blow, dishonor her husband and her child."

　　"No, no -- oh, no!"

　　"Well, madame, it will be a laudable action on your part,and I will thank you for it!"

　　"You will thank me -- for what?"

　　"For what you have just said."

　　"What did I say? Oh, my brain whirls; I no longer understandanything. Oh, my God, my God!" And she rose, with her hairdishevelled, and her lips foaming.

　　"Have you answered the question I put to you on entering theroom? -- where do you keep the poison you generally use,madame?" Madame de Villefort raised her arms to heaven, andconvulsively struck one hand against the other. "No, no,"she vociferated, "no, you cannot wish that!"

　　"What I do not wish, madame, is that you should perish onthe scaffold. Do you understand?" asked Villefort.

　　"Oh, mercy, mercy, monsieur!"

　　"What I require is, that justice be done. I am on the earthto punish, madame," he added, with a flaming glance; "anyother woman, were it the queen herself, I would send to theexecutioner; but to you I shall be merciful. To you I willsay, `Have you not, madame, put aside some of the surest,deadliest, most speedy poison?'"

　　"Oh, pardon me, sir; let me live!"

　　"She is cowardly," said Villefort.

　　"Reflect that I am your wife!"

　　"You are a poisoner."

　　"In the name of heaven!"

　　"No!"

　　"In the name of the love you once bore me!"

　　"No, no!"

　　"In the name of our child! Ah, for the sake of our child,let me live!"

　　"No, no, no, I tell you; one day, if I allow you to live,you will perhaps kill him, as you have the others!"

　　"I? -- I kill my boy?" cried the distracted mother, rushingtoward Villefort; "I kill my son? Ha, ha, ha!" and afrightful, demoniac laugh finished the sentence, which waslost in a hoarse rattle. Madame de Villefort fell at herhusband's feet. He approached her. "Think of it, madame," hesaid; "if, on my return, justice his not been satisfied, Iwill denounce you with my own mouth, and arrest you with myown hands!" She listened, panting, overwhelmed, crushed; hereye alone lived, and glared horribly. "Do you understandme?" he said. "I am going down there to pronounce thesentence of death against a murderer. If I find you alive onmy return, you shall sleep to-night in the conciergerie."Madame de Villefort sighed; her nerves gave way, and shesunk on the carpet. The king's attorney seemed to experiencea sensation of pity; he looked upon her less severely, and,bowing to her, said slowly, "Farewell, madame, farewell!"That farewell struck Madame de Villefort like theexecutioner's knife. She fainted. The procureur went out,after having double-locked the door.

　　Chapter 109The Assizes.

　　The Benedetto affair, as it was called at the Palais, and bypeople in general, had produced a tremendous sensation.Frequenting the Cafe de Paris, the Boulevard de Gand, andthe Bois de Boulogne, during his brief career of splendor,the false Cavalcanti had formed a host of acquaintances. Thepapers had related his various adventures, both as the manof fashion and the galley-slave; and as every one who hadbeen personally acquainted with Prince Andrea Cavalcantiexperienced a lively curiosity in his fate, they alldetermined to spare no trouble in endeavoring to witness thetrial of M. Benedetto for the murder of his comrade inchains. In the eyes of many, Benedetto appeared, if not avictim to, at least an instance of, the fallibility of thelaw. M. Cavalcanti, his father, had been seen in Paris, andit was expected that he would re-appear to claim theillustrious outcast. Many, also, who were not aware of thecircumstances attending his withdrawal from Paris, werestruck with the worthy appearance, the gentlemanly bearing,and the knowledge of the world displayed by the oldpatrician, who certainly played the nobleman very well, solong as he said nothing, and made no arithmeticalcalculations. As for the accused himself, many rememberedhim as being so amiable, so handsome, and so liberal, thatthey chose to think him the victim of some conspiracy, sincein this world large fortunes frequently excite themalevolence and jealousy of some unknown enemy. Every one,therefore, ran to the court; some to witness the sight,others to comment upon it. From seven o'clock in the morninga crowd was stationed at the iron gates, and an hour beforethe trial commenced the hall was full of the privileged.Before the entrance of the magistrates, and indeedfrequently afterwards, a court of justice, on days when someespecial trial is to take place, resembles a drawing-roomwhere many persons recognize each other and converse if theycan do so without losing their seats; or, if they areseparated by too great a number of lawyers, communicate bysigns.

　　It was one of the magnificent autumn days which make amendsfor a short summer; the clouds which M. de Villefort hadperceived at sunrise had all disappeared as if by magic, andone of the softest and most brilliant days of Septembershone forth in all its splendor.

　　Beauchamp, one of the kings of the press, and thereforeclaiming the right of a throne everywhere, was eyingeverybody through his monocle. He perceived Chateau-Renaudand Debray, who had just gained the good graces of asergeant-at-arms, and who had persuaded the latter to letthem stand before, instead of behind him, as they ought tohave done. The worthy sergeant had recognized the minister'ssecretary and the millionnaire, and, by way of paying extraattention to his noble neighbors, promised to keep theirplaces while they paid a visit to Beauchamp.

　　"Well," said Beauchamp, "we shall see our friend!"

　　"Yes, indeed!" replied Debray. "That worthy prince. Deucetake those Italian princes!"

　　"A man, too, who could boast of Dante for a genealogist, andcould reckon back to the `Divine Comedy.'"

　　"A nobility of the rope!" said Chateau-Renaudphlegmatically.

　　"He will be condemned, will he not?" asked Debray ofBeauchamp.

　　"My dear fellow, I think we should ask you that question;you know such news much better than we do. Did you see thepresident at the minister's last night?"

　　"Yes."

　　"What did he say?"

　　"Something which will surprise you."

　　"Oh, make haste and tell me, then; it is a long time sincethat has happened."

　　"Well, he told me that Benedetto, who is considered aserpent of subtlety and a giant of cunning, is really but avery commonplace, silly rascal, and altogether unworthy ofthe experiments that will be made on his phrenologicalorgans after his death."

　　"Bah," said Beauchamp, "he played the prince very well."

　　"Yes, for you who detest those unhappy princes, Beauchamp,and are always delighted to find fault with them; but notfor me, who discover a gentleman by instinct, and who scentout an aristocratic family like a very bloodhound ofheraldry."

　　"Then you never believed in the principality?"

　　"Yes. -- in the principality, but not in the prince."

　　"Not so bad," said Beauchamp; "still, I assure you, hepassed very well with many people; I saw him at theministers' houses."

　　"Ah, yes," said Chateau-Renaud. "The idea of thinkingministers understand anything about princes!"

　　"There is something in what you have just said," saidBeauchamp, laughing.

　　"But," said Debray to Beauchamp, "if I spoke to thepresident, you must have been with the procureur."

　　"It was an impossibility; for the last week M. de Villeforthas secluded himself. It is natural enough; this strangechain of domestic afflictions, followed by the no lessstrange death of his daughter" --

　　"Strange? What do you mean, Beauchamp?"

　　"Oh, yes; do you pretend that all this has been unobservedat the minister's?" said Beauchamp, placing his eye-glass inhis eye, where he tried to make it remain.

　　"My dear sir," said Chateau-Renaud, "allow me to tell youthat you do not understand that manoeuvre with the eye-glasshalf so well as Debray. Give him a lesson, Debray."

　　"Stay," said Beauchamp, "surely I am not deceived."

　　"What is it?"

　　"It is she!"

　　"Whom do you mean?"

　　"They said she had left."

　　"Mademoiselle Eugenie?" said Chateau-Renaud; "has shereturned?"

　　"No, but her mother."

　　"Madame Danglars? Nonsense! Impossible!" saidChateau-Renaud; "only ten days after the flight of herdaughter, and three days from the bankruptcy of herhusband?"

　　Debray colored slightly, and followed with his eyes thedirection of Beauchamp's glance. "Come," he said, "it isonly a veiled lady, some foreign princess, perhaps themother of Cavalcanti. But you were just speaking on a veryinteresting topic, Beauchamp."

　　"I?"

　　"Yes; you were telling us about the extraordinary death ofValentine."

　　"Ah, yes, so I was. But how is it that Madame de Villefortis not here?"

　　"Poor, dear woman," said Debray, "she is no doubt occupiedin distilling balm for the hospitals, or in making cosmeticsfor herself or friends. Do you know she spends two or threethousand crowns a year in this amusement? But I wonder sheis not here. I should have been pleased to see her, for Ilike her very much."

　　"And I hate her," said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"Why?"

　　"I do not know. Why do we love? Why do we hate? I detesther, from antipathy."

　　"Or, rather, by instinct."

　　"Perhaps so. But to return to what you were saying,Beauchamp."

　　"Well, do you know why they die so multitudinously at M. deVillefort's?"

　　"`Multitudinously' [drv] is good," said Chateau-Renaud.

　　"My good fellow, you'll find the word in Saint-Simon."

　　"But the thing itself is at M. de Villefort's; but let's getback to the subject."

　　"Talking of that," said Debray, "Madame was making inquiriesabout that house, which for the last three months has beenhung with black."

　　"Who is Madame?" asked Chateau-Renaud.

　　"The minister's wife, pardieu!"

　　"Oh, your pardon! I never visit ministers; I leave that tothe princes."

　　"Really, You were only before sparkling, but now you arebrilliant; take compassion on us, or, like Jupiter, you willwither us up."

　　"I will not speak again," said Chateau-Renaud; "pray havecompassion upon me, and do not take up every word I say."

　　"Come, let us endeavor to get to the end of our story,Beauchamp; I told you that yesterday Madame made inquiriesof me upon the subject; enlighten me, and I will thencommunicate my information to her."

　　"Well, gentlemen, the reason people die so multitudinously(I like the word) at M. de Villefort's is that there is anassassin in the house!" The two young men shuddered, for thesame idea had more than once occurred to them. "And who isthe assassin;" they asked together.

　　"Young Edward!" A burst of laughter from the auditors didnot in the least disconcert the speaker, who continued, --"Yes, gentlemen; Edward, the infant phenomenon, who is quitean adept in the art of killing."

　　"You are jesting."

　　"Not at all. I yesterday engaged a servant, who had justleft M. de Villefort -- I intend sending him away to-morrow,for he eats so enormously, to make up for the fast imposedupon him by his terror in that house. Well, now listen."

　　"We are listening."

　　"It appears the dear child has obtained possession of abottle containing some drug, which he every now and thenuses against those who have displeased him. First, M. andMadame de Saint-Meran incurred his displeasure, so he pouredout three drops of his elixir -- three drops weresufficient; then followed Barrois, the old servant of M.Noirtier, who sometimes rebuffed this little wretch -- hetherefore received the same quantity of the elixir; the samehappened to Valentine, of whom he was jealous; he gave herthe same dose as the others, and all was over for her aswell as the rest."

　　"Why, what nonsense are you telling us?" saidChateau-Renaud.

　　"Yes, it is an extraordinary story," said Beauchamp; "is itnot?"

　　"It is absurd," said Debray.

　　"Ah," said Beauchamp, "you doubt me? Well, you can ask myservant, or rather him who will no longer be my servantto-morrow, it was the talk of the house."

　　"And this elixir, where is it? what is it?"

　　"The child conceals it."

　　"But where did he find it?"

　　"In his mother's laboratory."

　　"Does his mother then, keep poisons in her laboratory?"

　　"How can I tell? You are questioning me like a king'sattorney. I only repeat what I have been told, and like myinformant I can do no more. The poor devil would eatnothing, from fear."

　　"It is incredible!"

　　"No, my dear fellow, it is not at all incredible. You sawthe child pass through the Rue Richelieu last year, whoamused himself with killing his brothers and sisters bysticking pins in their ears while they slept. The generationwho follow us are very precocious."

　　"Come, Beauchamp," said Chateau-Renaud, "I will bet anythingyou do not believe a word of all you have been telling us."

　　"I do not see the Count of Monte Cristo here."

　　"He is worn out," said Debray; "besides, he could not wellappear in public, since he has been the dupe of theCavalcanti, who, it appears, presented themselves to himwith false letters of credit, and cheated him out of 100,000francs upon the hypothesis of this principality."

　　"By the way, M. de Chateau-Renaud," asked Beauchamp, "how isMorrel?"

　　"Ma foi, I have called three times without once seeing him.Still, his sister did not seem uneasy, and told me thatthough she had not seen him for two or three days, she wassure he was well."

　　"Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannotappear in the hall," said Beauchamp.

　　"Why not?"

　　"Because he is an actor in the drama."

　　"Has he assassinated any one, then?"

　　"No, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him. Youknow that it was in leaving his house that M. de Caderoussewas murdered by his friend Benedetto. You know that thefamous waistcoat was found in his house, containing theletter which stopped the signature of the marriage-contract.Do you see the waistcoat? There it is, all blood-stained, onthe desk, as a testimony of the crime."

　　"Ah, very good."

　　"Hush, gentlemen, here is the court; let us go back to ourplaces." A noise was heard in the hall; the sergeant calledhis two patrons with an energetic "hem!" and the door-keeperappearing, called out with that shrill voice peculiar to hisorder, ever since the days of Beaumarchais, "The court,gentlemen!"

　　MZXFIR